•

ISSN 0002-9920

of the American Mathematical Society
June/July 2003

Volume 50, Number 6

An Introduction to
Heisenberg Groups in
Analysis and Geometry
page 640

The Moduli Space of
Curves and Its
Tautological Ring
page 647

Hidden symmetries (see page 639)

,._~; , ,~'L_J "._~~
IBID
.:~",' .: ~."',;: "., "':. ,." :'~",. ':

•.•"',,.•.:•,

",:

..............

:

.'.•, .•,.•j•. ':'"

:,'..(.,•'• •.','. . :.'.,.":,.'•.:,'. .

..',•.:'•,". :•,'. ,'. . . .

",J .

j"'.,~: ~: :."~,'

• .•

•• ,.;
•• •.

:'

,..

:

:..••
,•'",•.'.,•.,•' ,.' ,:.'•:.•. . . .

..

. :,"~ .

;:Y""'·!TM
•j".• .
.•

._J ,.,,-,#

What more could one do with the venerable Maple™ worksheet environment?
Plenty! First, notice how everything has a fresher look about it, right down to the graphics. Then, explore the new help interface that effortlessly tames the immense Maple help knowledge

base. Wow! Maple 9 even puts in the semicolon for you at the end of a command! In fact, the command completion feature will even guide you through the arsenal of Maple tools. No rocket
science here ... just countless improvements to make the Maple experience smoother, easier and more productive ... and if you are a rocket scientist, Maple 9 delivers a host of new NAG®
algorithms, optimized MATLAB® and Visual Basic® code generation, industrial strength FFT, OpenViz™ rendering, and the OpenMaple™ API for accessing the power of Maple 9 from external
applications. If you teach, you'll appreciate tile wealth of new resources, packages for education, MapleFM Web connectivity via MapleNet™*, and Mac OS@! X support.

"Note: fV13pieNeT not inrAlded witll purchase of iv1aple 9

For more information, call 800.267.6583.
Outside the US & Canada, ca11519.747.2373
or visit www.maplesoft.com
for your local distributor.

Maple56ft
command

th~

brilliance

it. 519.747.2373 I f.519.747.5284

& Canada 800.267.6583

info@maplesoft.com

STIMULATING MATHEMATICS FROM CAMBRIDGE
The Prime Number Theorem
Graham Jameson
Suitable for advanced undergraduates and beginning graduates, this textbook demonstrates how the
tools of analysis can be used in number theory to attack a famous problem.
London Mathematical Society Student Textst Series Number 53
0-521-81411-1
Hardback
$75.00
Paperback
$25.00
0-521-89110-8

Elementary Number Theory, Group Theory, and Ramanujan ~raphs
Guiliana Davidoff; Peter Sarnak and Alain Valette
This text is a self contained treatlnent of expander graphs and, in particular, their explicit construction.
London Mathematical Society Student Texts, Series Number 55
0-521-82426-5
Hardback
$65.00
0-521-53143-8
Paperback
$24.00

3-D Computer Graphics
A Mathematical Introduction with OpenGL
Samuel R. Buss
This introduction to 3D computer graphics emphasizes fundamentals and the mathematics underlying
computer graphics while also covering programming techniques using OpenGL.
0-521-82103-7

Hardback

$65.00

Generalized Riemann Problems in Computational Fluid Dynamics
Matan;a Ben-Artzi and Joseph Fa/covitz
This monograph presents the GRP methodology ranging from underlying mathematical principles
through basic scheme analysis and scheme extensions.
0-521-77296-6

Hardback

$75.00

Complex Variables
Introduction and Applications Second Edition
Mark J. Ablowitz and Athanassios S. Fokas
l

Part I of th.is text provides an introduction to the subject, including residue calculus and transfor.m
methods. Part II moves on to conformal mappings, and the study of Riemann-Hilbert problems.
0-521-53429-1

Paperback

$48.00

Abelian Varieties, Theta Functions and the Fourier Transform
Alexander Polishchuk
This book presents a mod~rn treatment of the theory of theta functions in the context of algebraic
geometry.
0-521-80804-9

Hardback

$70.00

Automatic Sequences
Theory, Applications, Generalizations
Jean-Paul AI/ouche and Jeffrey Shallit
Combining concepts of mathematics and computer science, this book is about the sequences of
symbols that can be generated by simple models of computation called finite automata".
If

0-521-82332-3

Hardback

$50.00*

*Prices subject to change.

Available in bookstores or from

CAMBRIDGE
UNIVERSITY PRESS

800-872-7423
us.cambridge.org/mathematics

NEW f6 FORTHCOMING from Birkhauser
Forthcoming

Noncommutative
Harmonic Analysis
In Honor of Jacques Carmona
P. DELORME, Institut de Mathematiques de Luminy, Marseille,
France; and M. VERGNE, Ecole Polytechnique, Palaiseau,
France (Eds.)

Noncommutative harmonic analysis is the focus of this
volume in honor of Jacques Carmona. Topics encompass
the theory of representations of reductive Lie groups,
determination of the unitary dual, geometric realizations of representations; harmonic analysis on reductive
symmetric space, automorphic forms, and results in
harmonic analysis that apply to the Langlands program.
General Lie groups are discussed, particularly from the
orbit method perspective, a source of inspiration for
the theory of reductive and general Lie groups.
Kontsevich quantization is also discussed.
CONTRIBUTORS: V. Baldoni-Silva, D. Barbasch, L.
Barchini, P. Bieliavsky, A. Bouaziz, N. Bopp, P. Delorme,
Van Den Ban, P. Harinck, A. Hersant, M.S. Khalgui, A.
Knapp, B. Kostant, J. Kuttler, M. Libine, L. Mantini, S. D.
Miller, M.-N. Panichi, M. Pevzner, W. Rossmann, H.
Rubenthaler, W. Schmid, P. Torasso, C. Torossian, M.
Vergne, N.R. Wallach.
2003/APPROX. 420 PP'/HARDCOVER/S89.95 (TENI)
ISBN 0-8176-3207-7
PROGRESS IN MATHEMATICS

Forthcoming

Basic Real Analysis
H. H. SOHRAB, Towson State University, Towson, MD

Basic RealAnalysis covers the fundamentals, but
extends beyond standard real variable texts to include a
careful discussion of topology, probability, number
systems, integration theory, Banach and Hilbert space
theory, and Fourier series. In clear exposition, the
author constructs the Cantor set and Weierstrass
nowhere differentiable function, and also proves the
Weierstrass approximation theorem. Different types of
convergence, monotone functions, and basic functional
analysis, and special topics in Fourier series are
presented; the book maintains a broad view of analysis
and mathematics.
Included are numerous examples, exercises, and a
comprehensive bibliography. The text is ideal for selfstudy or as a reference. This intuitive yet rigorous
treatment is suited to an introductory course for senior
undergraduates; the more advanced topics make it
useful for beginning graduate students.
2003/568 PP'/HARDCOVER/S59.95
ISBN 0-8176-4211-0

A Geometric Approach
to Thermomechanics of
Dissipating Continua
1. RAKOTOMANANA, Universitee de Rennes 1, France

This self-contained monograph focuses on the modeling of continua that exhibit the property of singularities
in fields. Arational theory of continuum thermomechanics that takes into account the existence and distribution of scalar and vector discontinuities is presented;
guiding the work is the notion that discontinuities
should be modeled by the torsion and curvature tensors. Emphasis is on the relationship between singularities and certain irreversible properties that occur in
solid and fluid models. The required mathematical
background is given in several appendices. The book will
benefit graduate students, researchers, and engineers
in applied mathematics, mechanics, and physics.
TABLE OF CONTENTS: Introduction • Geometry and
Kinematics· Conservation Laws • Continuum with
Singularity • Thermo-Viscous Fluids • Thermo-Viscous
Solids • Solids with Dry Micro-Cracks • Conclusion •
App. A. Mathematical Preliminaries • App. B. Invariance
Group and Physical Laws • App. CAffinely Connected
Manifolds • App. 0 Bianchi s identities • App. E
Theorem of Cauchy-Weyl • References • Index
I

2003/APPROX. 276 PP'/HARDCOVER/S89.95
ISBN 0-8176-4283-8
PROGRESS IN MATHEMATICAL,PHYSICS, VOLUME 31

Flow Lines and Algebraic
Invariants 'in Contact
Form Geometry
A. BAHRI, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ

Over the last 20 years, contact form geometry has
developed into avast area of research related to
conformal geometry in several ways, including pseudoholomorphic curves and Gromov-Witten invariants
(contact homology). The approach developed here
defines another set of algebraic invariants in this field
that are in the method of critical points at infinity, a
notion introduced and developed by the author. This
systematic text provides new tools to understand the
geometry of contact forms, the periodic and singular
motions of their Reeb vector -fields, and the relations
of this field with conformal and CR geometries.
TABLE OF CONTENTS: Preface • Introduction,
Statement of Results, Discussion of the Related
Hypotheses • Review of the Previous Results, Some
Open Questions • Intermediate Section • True Critical
Points at Infinity • Removal of (AS) • Conditions (A2) (A3) - (A4) - (A6) • Bibliography • Index
2003/APPROX. 250 PP., 50 ILLUS'/HARDCOVER/S89.95
ISBN 0-8176-4318-4
PROGRESS IN NONLINEAR DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS AND THEIR
APPLICATIONS, VOLUME 53

CALL: 1-800-777-4643 • FAX: (201) 348-4505
E-MAIL: orders@birkhauser.com • www.birkhauser.com
Please mention promotion #Y7262 when ordering. Prices are valid in the Americas only
and are subject to change without notice. For price and ordering information outside the Americas,
please contact Birkhauser Verlag AG or E-mail: birkhauser@springer.de

6/03

A Handbook of
Real Variables
With Applications to Differential
Equations and Fourier Analysis

s. G. KRANTZ, Washington University, St. Louis, MO
This concise, self-contained handbook takes into
account the fundamentals of real analysis and sheds
light on its significant applications to differential
equations and Fourier analysis. Ample examples, cross
references, bibliography, and index make the work
especially useful for a wide audience of natural and
social scientists and engineers. This is a handbook of
practice rather than theory, a reference for those who
wish to have easy access to the results and applications
of real analysis, but do not necessarily have the time to
appreciate all the theory.
2003/APPROX. 240 PP., 30 ILLUS'/HARDCOVER/S49.95 (TENI)
ISBN 0-8176-4329-X

Foundations of Logic
and Mathematics
Applications to Computer Science and
Cryptography
Y. NIEVERGELT, Eastern Washington University, Cheney, WA

"The way [the topics} are presented is highly original... The author... combine[s} the foundational
approach with acareful treatment ofmany applications. All the results are proved in full detail from first
principles.. .remarkably, the arithmetic laws on the
rational numbers are proved, step after step, starting
from the very definitions!... This is avaluable reference
text and auseful companion for anybody wondering
how basic mathematical concepts can be rigorously
developed within set theory." -MATHEMATICAL REVIEWS
Solutions manual is available upon adoption of text.
2002/432 PP., 22 ILLUS'/HARDCOVER/S59.95
ISBN 0-8176-4249-8

Topics in Quantum
Mechanics
F. WILLIAMS, University ofMassachusetts, Amherst, MA

The self-contained monograph offers covers the
foundations of quantum mechanics: the Planck and
Schrodinger quantization, de Broglie's wavelength,
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle, group representations and selection rules, Pauli's spin functions, and an
introduction to multielectron atoms. Topics include
Feynman path integrals, quantum statistical partition
functions, and high and low temperature asymptotics of
quantum fields over negatively curved space-time. The
text presents some new and exciting applications of
mathematics to problems in physics.
2003/416 PP., 20 ILLUS'/HARDCOVER/S79.95·
ISBN 0-8176-4311-7
PROGRESS IN MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS, VOLUME 27

Birkhiiuser
Boston · Basel· Berlin

i
Promotion #Y7262

•

o ICeS

June/July 2003

of the American Mathematical Society

Feature Articles
640 An Introduction to Heisenberg Groups in Analysis and

Geometry
Stephen Semmes
This article discusses some aspects of Heisenberg groups and the ways in which their algebraic
structure is ref7ected in Fourier analysis, complex· analysis, and geometry.

647 The Moduli Space of Curves and Its

Tautological Ring
Ravi Vakil
The moduli space of curves plays a key role in algebraic geometry. This
article focuses on the so-called tautological ring, emphasizing its combinatorial structure.

Communications
666 WHAT IS a Bubble Tree?
Thomas H. Parker

678 Three Views of Peer Review
Steven G. Krantz, Greg Kuperberg, Alf
van der Poorten

683 Staffing Shifts in Mathematical
Sciences Departments, 1990-2000
David]. Lutzer and]ames ~ Maxwell

687 NSF Fiscal Year 2004 Budget
Request
Allyn]ackson

690 Mathematical Sciences in the
FY 2004 Budget
Samuel M. Rankin III

693 Serre Receives Abel Prize
f

Memorial
660 Arnold Ross (1906-2002)
Prakash Bambah, Thomas Banchoff, FeliX
Browder, Allyn]ackson, David Pollack, Peter
Roquette, Karl Rubin, Paul]. Sally]r., James
Schultz, Daniel Shapiro, Alice Silverberg,
Glenn Stevens, Bert K. Waits, Max
Warshauer, Gloria Woods

Commentary
637' Opinion
638 Letters to the Editor
668 Emergence of the Theory ofLie
Groups-A.Book Review
" Reviewed by David E. Rowe

Notices
EDITOR: Harold P. Boas
ASSOCIATE EDITORS:

Susanne C. Brenner, Bill Casselman (Covers Editor),
Robert]. Daverman, Nathaniel Dean, Rick Durrett,
Susan Friedlander, Robion Kirby, Elliott H. Lieb,
Andy Magid, Judith Roitman, Mark Saul, Karen E.
Smith, Audrey Terras, Lisa Traynor
SENIOR WRITER and DEPUTY EDITOR:

Allyn Jackson
MANAGING EDITOR: Sandra Frost
CONTRIBUTING WRITER: Elaine Kehoe
PRODUCTION ASSISTANT: Muriel Toupin
PRODUCTION: Marcia Almeida, Kyle Antonevich,
Siulam Fernandes, Stephen Moye, Lori Nero, Karen
Ouellette, Donna Salter, Deborah Smith, Peter Sykes
ADVERTISING SALES: Anne Newcomb
SUBSCRIPTION INFORMATION: Subscription prices
for Volume 50 (2003) are $382 list; $306 institutional
member; $229 individual member. (The subscription
price for members is included in the annual dues.) A
late charge of 10% of the subscription price will be
imposed upon orders received from nonmembers
after January 1 of the subscription year. Add for
postage: Surface delivery outside the United States
and India-$20; in India-$40; expedited delivery to
destinations in North America-$35; elsewhere-$87.
Subscriptions and orders for AMS publications should
be addressed to the American Mathematical Society,
P.O. Box 845904, Boston, MA 02284-5904 USA. All
orders must be prepaid. '

Notices publishes situations wanted
and classified advertising, and display advertising for
publishers and academic or scientific organizations.
Advertising material or questions may be faxed to
401-331-3842 (indicate "Notices advertising" on fax
cover sheet).
ADVERTISING:

Departments
Mathematics People
695
2003-2004 AMS Centennial Fellowships Awarded, Ferran
Sunyer i 'Balaguer Prize Awarded, Choquet-Bruhat and York
Awarded 2003 Heineman Prize, Green Awarded DeMorgan
Medal, Guionnet Awarded Rollo Davidson Prize, Presidential
Awards for Mentoring, 2003 Sloan Fellows Announced, NSF
Graduate Research Fellowships Announced, Guggenheim
Fellowships Awarded, Fulbright Awards Announced, 2003 Intel
Science Talent Search Winners Announced, National Academy
of Engineering Elections.
Mathematics Opportunities
699
NSF CAREER Program Guidelines Available, Call for Nominations
for Sloan Fellowships, NSF Supplements for Undergraduate
Education in Biological and Mathematical Sciences, NSF
Program on Approaches to Combat Terrorism, Fulbright
Lecturing/Research Grants, Call for Nominations for AWM Hay
and Schafer Awards, Call for Nominations for National Medal of
Science, News from the Fields Institute, News from the IMA.
For Your Information
702
Peter Goddard Named lAS Director, James Carlson Named Clay
Institute President, Changes in Procedures for 2003 AMS
Elections.
Inside the AMS
703
Eisenbud Presents Testimony, Epsilon Awards for 2003, AMS
Book Prize Established, Michael Downes (7958-2003), Deaths of
AMS Members.
Reference and Book List

706

Mathematics Calendar

71 5

New Publications Offered by the AMS

726

Classifieds

736

AMS Membership Forms

739

Meetings and Conferences Table of Contents

760

SUBMISSIONS: Articles and letters may be sent to the

editor by email at not; ces@math . tamu . edu, by fax at
979-845-6028, or by postal mail at Department of
Mathematics, Texas A&M University, College Station,
TX 77843-3368. Email is preferred. Correspondence
with the managing editor may be sent to not; ces@
ams.org. For more information, see the section
"Reference and Book List".
NOTICES ON THE AMS WEBSITE: Most of this publication is available electronically through the AMS website, the Society's resource for delivering electronic
products and services. Use the URi http://www . ams .
org/not; ces/ to access the Notices on the website.

[Notices oftheAmericanMathematicalSociety is published
monthly except bimonthly in June/July by the American
Mathematical Society at 201 Charles Street, Providence,
RI02904-2294 USA, GSTNo.12189 2046RT~'(*~'(*.Periodi­
cals postage paid at Providence, RI, and additional mailing offices. POSTMASTER: Send address change notices to
Notices of the American Mathematical Society, P.O. Box
6248, Providence, RI 02940-6248 USA.] Publication here
of the Society's street address and the other information
in brackets above is a technical requirement of the U.S.
PostalService. Tel: 401-455-4000, email: not; ces@ams.org.
© Copyright 2003 by the
American Mathematical Society.
All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
The paper used in this journal is acid-free and
falls within the guidelines established
to ensure permanence and durability.

Fro ~!~i~t~,~:::~';~;,'~":=l
AM ~;~f!~~~~ilfl
(

~

Opinion

What's the Big Idea?
We mathematicians are fond of telling our students that
mathematics is not a spectator sport. Watching someone
else test infinite series for convergence engenders no
facility in testing series oneself. Lately, however, the
mainstream press has shown a laudable interest in
eavesdropping on developments in mathematical research.
I am encouraged to see reporters trying to convey both
the excitement of mathematical discovery and a hint of the
underlying mathematical ideas.
After the hoopla surrounding Andrew Wiles's proof of
Fermat's Last Theorem died down, years passed during
which the words "elliptic curve" did not appear in the New
York Times except in passing (as in the 1998 obituary of
Andre Weil). Then a news item by Sara Robinson in July 2002
not only used the words but also gave some indication of the
mathematics underlying the reconstruction by Hendrik W.
Lenstra Jr. and Bart de Smit of Escher's lithograph "Print
Gallery" (see the cover story in the April 2003 issue of the
Notices).
In August 2002 the mathematical world was flabbergasted by the new algorithm of Agrawal, Kayal, and
Saxena for testing primality of integers (see the article by
Folkmar Bornemann in the May 2003 issue). The three
researchers posted a preprint on the Internet, and within
days Sara Robinson published a story about the breakthrough. Writing for the New York Times audience, she
could not use mathematical language to describe the
new algorithm as proving that the problem of determining primality belongs to the polynomial-time complexity
class P, but her article did suggest the frenzy of activity
that was occurring as the new idea circulated around the
mathematical community.
This year has seen a similar ferment among number
theorists about a preprint of Dan Goldston and Cem
YlldITllll on "Small gaps between primes". Nobody knows
how to attack the twin-prime conjecture, which states that
there are infinitely many prime numbers p for which p + 2
is also prime, but Goldston and YIldlrlm developed a new
technique that seemed to smash all previous records about
how close together consecutive primes are infinitely often.
I am pleased that the press reported the story coherently.
On April 9 a news item in the journal Nature stated "Around
a number x in the sequence of integers, the average
spacing between consecutive primes is proportional to
the logarithm of x . ... Goldston and YIldlrllll have shown
that the gaps between consecutive primes can indeed be
significantly smaller than the average (log x)."
"The idea is the important thing," said mathematician
and songwriter Tom Lehrer in his 1965 performance at the
hungry i nightclub. Satirizing the "New Math", he used
then-current mathematical pedagogy to obtain a wrong
answer to an arithmetic problem, and the audience burst
JUNE/JULY 2003

into laughter at his comment. Despite the humorous
context of the remark, it has more than a grain of truth.
We mathematicians do pride ourselves on our rigorous
logic and on our attention to detail, but above all we value
the big ideas.
As this issue of the Notices goes to the printer, there
appears to be a problem in the proof of Goldston and
Ylldlrlm: some error terms originally thought to be of
lower order are actually of the same size as the main term.
Whatever the ultimate results turn out to be, I hope that
future stories in the press describe the work of Goldston
and YildITlm as a success story: Their intriguing original
idea has all the experts burning the midnight oil to figure
out the implications. How many of us can say the same
about our research?
Topologists too were abuzz this spring about a dramatic development in their field: the low-key announcement
by Grisha Perelman that he can prove William P. Thurston's
geometrization conjecture by adapting Richard Hamilton's
program. A corollary would be the Poincare conjecture, that
every simply connected, compact, three-dimensional
manifold without boundary is homeomorphic to the threesphere. Perelman has posted to the arXiv two preprints on
his work (November 11, 2002, and March 10, 2003), with
more promised.
Although Perelman is not giving interviews ("premature"), the $1 million prize offered by the Clay Mathematics Institute for a proof of the Poincare conjecture
makes the story irresistible. In the span of six days in
April, the New York Times ran two articles about Perelman's
attack on the Poincare conjecture. I find it noteworthy
that these articles use language that we mathematicians
ourselves might employ. Checking Perelman's work will
take some time, says one article, but in view of his new
ideas, "[I]t is clear that his work will make a substantial
contribution to mathematics." Says the other article: "That
grown men and women can make a living pondering such
matters is a sign that civilization, as fragile as it may
sometimes seem, remains intact."
I hope that the popular press will continue to portray
mathematics as being like a diamond: extremely hard
material, but valuable and highly prized both for its
industrial applications and for its intrinsic beauty.

NOTICES OF THE AMS

-Harold P. Boas

Editor

637

Letters to the Editor

Letters to the Ed itor
Mathematical Word Processing
While I respect the right of William C.
Hoffman to his own opinion about
Mathematical Word Processing (March
2003 issue), I deeply disagree with
him. Writing mathematics involves
much more than just writing. You
write, you send what you wrote to
coauthors, you read what they sent
you, you make corrections, etc. While
maybe T:@( is not ideal for those purposes, it is the best. Every mathematician using a computer for writing
papers has his or her favorite text editor. T:@( fits to all of them. I agree
that Microsoft Word is present on
more computers than T:@(, but also
many more people hate it. It produces
giant files that require specialized
software to read. When I am receiving
an email from my coauthor, in which
he quotes several lines from the paper
we are writing, I can understand it
independently of whether I am using
Microsoft Outlook Express in the
Windows environment or the Unix
command-line mail on a SUN.
-Michal Misiurewicz
Indiana University-Purdue University
Indianapolis

mmisiure@math.iupui.edu
(Received February 20, 2003)

William C. Hoffman ("Letters", March
2003) argues the inferiority of T:@( and
its derivatives, henceforth called
"~TF''' for brevity: "The AMS has been
captured by this ponderous, unintuitive, error-ridden software, and we
are all hostage to the obsolescence."
His suggested alternative, MathType
and Microsoft Word, is undesirable
for several reasons (none of which
apply to ~T:@(), but is also arrived at
via a false dichotomy: that authors
must choose between machine-friendliness and user-friendliness.
A mark-up language based on open
standards, such as ~T:@( or MathML, is
the logical choice for disseminating
and archiving academic literature.
Mark-up separates a document's
638

abstract structure from its appearance,
which in turn facilitates machine processing. This basic capability is essential to the consistency of print journals
and to the utility and longevity of electronic documents. (The assertion of
some ~TEX proponents that separating
form and content encourages logical
writing is at best a fringe benefit.) To
ensure documents' viability into the
unforeseeable future, it is equally crucial that file formats be based on open
standards, neither proprietary nor
encumbered by patents.
Most word processor file formats
are neither human-readable nor based
on open standards, as both goals are
counter to the aims of commercial
software. File formats are deliberately
obscure to thwart would-be competitors. Closed file formats all but force
users to upgrade when a new version
is released, since by design new files
cannot be read with older software.
This may be good business, but it is
bad for free exchange of information.
Files stored in proprietary format
are available only to someone who
has purchased a specific vendor's
product. This puts a substantial and
unnecessary financial burden on individuals and organizations, which is
exacerbated for users in developing
countries. ~T:@( is available at low or
no cost for all common operating systems and is bundled with the legally
sharable operating system GNUjUnux,
making ~T:@( available to anyone with
a computer.
The AMS may have additional reasons for strongly preferring ~TF' files
for electronic submission, but I am
confident that "lock in" due to "early
random events" in the history of mathematical typesetting is not among
them.
Hoffman also writes, "Freely writing mathematics has been replaced by
programming in a ponderous system
of macros." Readers who share Hoffman's frustration might be interested
in LyX (www. 1 YX. 0 rg), a free (both
GPL and no-cost) word-processor-like
interface to ~T:@( that runs on multiple platforms.
~TEX is among the oldest and stablest software applications in wide
use. In fifteen years of ~TEX-ing, I have
never encountered "macros that become obsolete from one edition to
NOTICES OF THE AMS

the next," so this charge is impossible
to answer. However, given Word's release history and notorious backward
compatibility problems, Hoffman's
criticisms are particularly ironic.
As for plain T:@(, its features may
not please everyone, but it does exactly what it claims to and is arguably
the most bug-free large program in
wide use. No commercial software
comes close.
-Andrew D. Hwang
College of the Holy Cross

ahwang@mathcs.holycross.edu
(Received February 22, 2003)
Mathematics Education
Steven Zucker's article [March 2003
"Opinion"] treats by design only informing students of their responsibilities in our basic courses. While it
is important to communicate those
things effectively, he doesn't address
the cognitive difficulties that students
have. These difficulties occur because
there are no warnings in going from
high school to college, and I wish to
bring these up. Some of these can't be
addressed unless the instructor handles them directly in class. More than
Zucker seems to allow, they should be
the responsibility of the instructor
during class time. Most of our students cannot'grapple with many of the
intellectual difficulties related to our
approach to mathematics on their
own.
Here is a cognitive difference between high school and the university.
High school classes study specific
functions like sin and polynomials.
They don't study collections of functions. Further, high school texts test
students on memorable properties of
a standard set of functions, often quadratic polynomials or sin. Students
don't get much chance to consider
the set of functions that satisfy certain
properties. It's too time-consuming
for class. Yet, it requires instructor
guidance for students to catch on. It
can't be left for the out-of-class exercises.
A major jump between high school
and college is that students in college will never again be tested on
properties of functions that they have
VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

Letters to the Editor

learned intensely. In the end, they
don't know functions at all; they know
this function and that function.
That's a difference between high
school and college. Here's a similarity.
High school material goes much
too fast for almost all students. It just
wooshes by. Ditto for college. There's
no time to practice independent problem solving. None of my colleagues
do problem solving of a slow analytic
nature in class. They haven't found a
way to weave occasional analysis
into a 45-minute presentation on one
problem as if it were a serious mathematical story with an interesting
punchline. There is no time for students to have the analysis register.
The reality for students is that independent problem solving is too slow
a process for them to get much from
it. What they do won't match the
speed of presentation of almost all
instructors at research universities.
Students feel bad taking forever to
accomplish what the instructor does
in two minutes.
Students may like you. You may
get good evaluations. Still, anyone can
see that from one class to the next
few students get much from the ma~
terial. Upon their failure to handle
problem-solving assignments, they
will tell you they worked for hours.
You may not believe them. I do.
They worked for hours, in the sense
of having struggled without a clue for
what to focus on. The only remedy I
know is to slow down in class. Take
some time showing them how to read
the material. Find out what their skills
are, and then try to build on them
using their still-limited vocabulary.
This will require some real people
intuition and empathy for students.
You won't cover the whole syllabus
either. Still, by doing this, you will
develop students who have seen a
higher analytical standard, from responses from some students in the
class. You might not get through all
the material in those big books we
get our syllabi from. Yet slowing down
at the beginning sometimes means
going at a reasonable rate at the end
where many classes just fall apart. '
Oh, yes. That is another difference
between high school and college.
College students find fewer of their
JUNE/JULY 2003

instructors have people intuition and
empathy.
-Mike Fried
University of California, Irvine

mfried@math.uci.edu
(Received February 28, 2003)
Response to Fried
Mike Fried's point about cognitive differences and similarities is both interesting and enlightening. Of course,
we all face similar issues in our
courses. A good part of the apparent
difference in our positions may be a
consequence of the difference in the
nature of our student bodies. He and
I do seem to agree that one should not
waste too much time in class on easy
About the Cover
Hidden Symmetries
This month's cover arose from a
suggestion of Ravi Vakil in order to
illustrate a point made in his article
on the moduli of algebraic curves
(p. 650, top of first column). It portrays the action of a discrete group
of non-Euclidean transformations
whose quotient is the curve of genus
three possessing as automorphism
group the projective matrix group
P SL 2 (~7 ) , the largest possible for a
curve of that genus. The large assembly of colored regions makes up
a fundamental domain for the fundamental group of this curve, and
the picture shows that the curve is
associated to a non-Euclidean tiling
by heptagons possessing the maximum degree of symmetry. As with
all such tilings, the automorphism
gr.oup of this tiling is a Coxeter group
wIth a nonbranching Coxeter diagram, in this case with links of multiplicities 3 and 7. The small triangles in the figure are the chambers
of this Coxeter group. The cyclic
symmetry of the curve of order 7 is
apparent in the figure, but the other
symmetries are more subtle. The
curve may be constructed explicitly
by gluing together boundary regions
according to color matching around
the edge.Other regular non-Euclidean
tesselations may be seen at http :/ /

things and should use the time to
reinforce the main conceptual points
and their role in solving problems.
Many of us have people intuition
and empathy; it's just that we may not
use them in the way that a high school
teacher (with different aspirations)
does. Instead, we want the student to
accept major responsibility in learning the subject and be willing to use
resources outside of the classroom. By
the way, the textbook, though sometimes hard to read, goes at the reader's
pace.
-Steven Zucker
Johns Hopkins University
http://www.math.jhu.edu/~sz

(Received March 26, 2003)

Hyperbal i cTessel ati ansi. The
~h~le book

The Eightfold Way by
SIlVIO Levy and others (Cambridge
UniversitY Press, 1999) is devoted to
this remarkable figure. It includes a
translation by Silvio Levy of the
classic article (Math. Ann. 14) by Felix
Klein on this figure. The German
original is available from the digitization project at http://134 . 76.

163.65:80/agora_docs/
29551TABLE_OF_CONTENTS.html.
The figure was constructed with the
help of a word recognizer for the
Coxeter group built by Derek Holt's
program kbmag. The apparent asymmetry in the boundary is there
because the graphics program I used
drew all chambers at a fixed word
length from one of them near, but not
at, the centre.
. I wis~ to thank Silvio Levy for help
In locatIng Klein's figure.
-Bill Casselman

(covers@ams. org)

www.hadron.org/~hatch/

NOTICES OF THE AMS

639

An Introduction to
Heisenberg Groups in
Analysis and Geometry
Stephen Semmes

640

eisenberg groups, in discrete and continuous versions, appear in many parts
of mathematics, including Fourier
analysis, several complex variables,
geometry, and topology. In the present
survey we shall not focus too much on any particular aspect, but try to give a kind of sampler. We
begin with something which is, in effect, basic calculus.
Commutators of Multiplication and
Differentiation Operators
Fix a positive integer n, and let v . W denote the
usualdotproductonR n , so that v . W = I]=l VjWj,
where Vj and Wj denote the jth components of v
and w, respectively. If v and ware elements of R n
and f is a function on R n, let us write Mw(f) for the
function on R n defined by Mw(f)(x) = (w . x)f(x),
and let us write Dv(f) for the function on R n which
is the directional derivative of f associated to v, Le.,
Dv(f)(x) = v . \7f(x). We shall not dwell on differentiability issues here, and so the reader is invited
to assume that the functions are sufficiently smooth
as might be convenient. The usual Leibniz rule for
differentiating products implies that

In other words, the commutator of the linear operators Mw and D v is equal to a constant multiple
of the identity operator, and that constant can be
nonzero in general.
Note that the commutator of two real or complex matrices of finite rank can never be equal to
a nonzero constant multiple of the identity matrix,
because the trace of the commutator is automatically zero. This observation uses the standard
identity that the trace of a product A B is the same
as the trace of the product B A. For linear operators on infinite-dimensional spaces, there are still
results to the effect that the commutator of two
bounded linear operators cannot be a nonzero
constant multiple of the identity, as on pp. 350-1
of [18]. See also [5].
As is well known, the fact that the Mw's and the
Dv's do not commute with each other in general is
connected to the Heisenberg uncertainty principle
in quantum mechanics.
Some Groups of Linear Operators
Let n still be a fixed positive integer, and let us
continue to consider linear operators acting on
functions on Rn • For each v in Rn , define the
operator Tv to be the operator of translation by v,
so that

Stephen Semmes is professor of mathematics at Rice University. His email address is semmes@math. ri ce. edu.
The author is grateful to an unnamed reader for very helpful comments and suggestions.
Dedicated to Eli Stein and Guido Weiss.

Tv(f)(x) = f(x - v).

Thus Tv is the identity operator exactly when v = 0,
and
Tv 0 Tv, = Tv +v'

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

for all v, v' ERn. In other words, the family of operators of the form Tv, vERn, forms an abelian
group which is isomorphic to R n as a group under
addition.
Fix a positive real number A. For each w in R n,
define Uw to be the operator of multiplication by
exp(2rriA w . x), so that

identity element, and (-v, -W, v . W - t) the inverse of (v, w, t).
When n = 1, one can associate a triple (v, w, t)
to a 3 x 3 real matrix

Uw(f)(x) = exp(2rri AW . x) f(x).

and then the gro.up operation (2) corresponds
exactly to matrix multiplication. In general, Hn(R)
can be identified with a subgroup of the group of
(n + 2) x (n + 2) real matrices with 1's along the
diagonal and O's below the diagonal.
Let i\ be a fixed positive real number, and let Tv
and Uw be the linear operators on functions on R n
as before. Consider the mapping from Hn(R) to
linear operators defined by

We should work with complex-valued functions
now to accommodate this complex exponential.
As before, Uw is equal to the identity operator if
and only if w = 0, and
Uw 0 Uw' = Uw+ w'

for all w, W' ERn. Thus the family of operators Uw ,
w ERn, forms an abelian group which is also
isomorphic to R n under addition.
How do these two families of operators interact?
What kind of group do they generate? To see this,
we can compute as follows:
Tv(Uw(f))(x)

= Uw(f)(x - v)

= exp(2rri Aw . (x - v)) f(x - v)
= exp(-2rri Aw . v) exp(2rri AW • x) Tv(f)(x)
= exp( -2rri Aw . v) Uw(Tv(f))(x).
In other words, Tv 0 Uw is equal to a constant multiple of Uw 0 Tv, where that constant is equal to
exp( -2rri AW . v). This is equivalent to saying that
the commutator Tv 0 Uw 0 (Tv)-l 0 (Uw)-l is equal
to a constant multiple of the identity, where that
constant is equal to exp(- 2rri AW . v). This is a
kind of multiplicative version of the commutator
equation (1).
Using this identity, one can check that the
family of operators of the form lX Tv 0 Uw, with
lX E C, IlXl = 1, and v, W ERn, forms a group under
composition. Note that the Fourier transform
interchanges the roles of first-order directional
derivatives and multiplication by linear functions,
and also the roles of translation operators and
multiplication by exponentials as above.
Definition of the nth Heisenberg Group
Let us define Hn(R) as follows. First, as a set, Hn(R)
is equal to R n x R n x R, i.e., the set of ordered
triples (v, w, t), where v and W lie in R n and t lies
in R. Next, we define a binary operation on Hn(R)
by
(2)

(v, w, t). (v', w', t')

= (v + v', W + w', t + t' + v' . w).
One can verify that with respect to this operation,
becomes a group, with (0,0,0) as the

Hn(R)

JUNE/JULY 2003

1

o
(

W

t)

1 v
001

(3)

(v, W, t)

f-+

,

exp(2rri A t) Tv 0 Uw .

One can verify that this mapping is a group
homomorphism, which is to say that the group
operation defined above for Hn(R) corresponds to
composition of linear operators. An element
(v, w, t) of Hn(R) is mapped to the identity operator exactly when v = W = 0 and i\ t is an integer.
Thus this homomorphism incorporates a periodicity in the t variable but is otherwise injective.
Let us be more precise and think of these linear
operators as acting on the Hilbert space L2(R n ) of
square-integrable functions on R n. These operators
are all unitary, which is to say that they map L 2 (Rn)
onto itself and preserve the usual integral Hermitian scalar product there. Thus for each A > 0
one gets a "unitary representation" of Hn(R) on
L 2 (R n ).

In addition to the group structure on Hn(R) ,
there is a natural family of dilations. Namely, for
each positive real number r, define a mapping b r
from Hn(R) to itself by
br(V, W, t) = (rv, rw, r 2 t).

This is a one-to-one mapping of Hn(R) onto itself
which preserves the group structure on Hn(R).
Also,
for all r, r' > 0, and Dr is the identity transformation exactly when r = 1.
If a = (vo, wo, to) is an element of Hn(R), consider
the mapping La from Hn(R) to itself defined by
left-multiplication by a, so that
La(v, W, t) = (vo, wo, to). (v, w, t).

It is not difficult to verify that ordinary Euclidean
volumes are preserved by La, which is to say that
the volume of a measurable set E is the same as the
volume of the image La(E) of E under La. As in ordinary vector calculus, this statement is equivalent

NOTICES OF THE AMS

641

to saying that the Jacobian of the mapping La,
which is the determinant of the differential of La,
is equal to 1 everywhere on H n (R). Indeed, it is easy
to see that the differential of La can be written in
terms of an upper-triangular matrix at each point,
where the diagonal part of the matrix is the same
as the identity matrix. For an upper-triangular
matrix, the determinant is simply the product of
the diagonal entries and hence is equal to 1 everywhere in this case.
In short, ordinary volume measure is invariant
under left translations in the Heisenberg group.
Similarly, it is invariant under right translations. It
also behaves nicely under dilations; namely, the
volume of br(E) is equal to r 2n + 2 times the volume
of E for all r > and all measurable sets E in
Hn(R). The number 2n + 2 is sometimes called the
homogeneous dimension of Hn(R) for this reason.
By contrast, if A is a measurable subset of R k and
one applies a standard dilation by a factor of t >
to A, then the volume of the result is t k times the
volume of A itself. Thus for ordinary Euclidean
spaces the "homogeneous dimension" is the same
as the vector-space dimension, which is the same
as the topological dimension, while for Hn(R) the
homogeneous dimension is equal to the topological dimension plus 1.
Discrete Versions of the Heisenberg Groups
Define H n (Z) to be the set of triples (v, w, t), where
v and W lie in zn and t lies in Z. It is easy to see
that this is a subgroup of Hn(R). It is a discrete
version of the Heisenberg group.
In addition to being a group, Hn(R) is a smooth
manifold of dimension 2n + 1, and the group
operation is smooth. The quotient Hn(R)/Hn(Z)
makes sense not only as a set of cosets, but also
as a compact smooth manifold of dimension 2 n + 1
without boundary. When n = 1, this manifold has
dimension 3, and it is one of the basic building
blocks for 3-manifolds discussed in [23].
Define aj in Hn(Z) for j = 1, ... , n to be the triple
(v, w, t) such that all components of v are equal to
except for the jth component, which is equal to 1,
and such that W = and t = 0. Similarly, define b j
in Hn(Z) for j = 1, ... , n to be the triple (v, w, t)
such that v = 0; all components of W are equal to
except for the jth component, which is equal to 1;
and t = 0. Define c in Hn(Z) to be the triple (0,0,1).
It is easy to see that the elements

°

°

°

°

and

If 1 ::; i,j ::; nand i =f:; j, then

When i = j we have in place of this
b i ai = ai b i c

for i = 1, ... , n. These relations describe the group
Hn(Z) completely; every element of Hn(Z) can be
represented in a unique way in the form (4), and
these relations are adequate to define the group
operation in terms of this representation.
Connections with Several Complex Variables
It will be convenient now to use a slightly different
formulation of the nth Heisenberg group. Define fin
to be cn x R equipped with the binary operation
(z, t) <> (z', t') = (z + z', t + t' + 21m

±

Zj zj )

l

J=l

where Zj and zj denote the jth components of Z
and z', and a denotes the complex conjugate of a
complex number a. One can check that this defines
a group operation on fin, where (0, 0) is the identity element and (-z, -t) is the inverse of (z, t). In
fact fin is isomorphic to Hn(R), as one can see by
associating to (x, Y, t) in Hn(R) the element

(5)

(x, 0) 0 (iy, 0) 0 (0, t)

of fin. The correspondence (x, Y, t) ~ (x + i Y, t)
does not quite work, and (5) adds in a suitable correction.
Put
(6)

'U n+ 1 = {( W , 0") E en x e : 1m 0" > I W 1 2 } ,

where IwI 2 = I]=1IwjI2, as usual. Thus

°

o'U n + 1 = {(w, 0") E Cn xC: 1m 0" = IwI 2 }.

For each (z, t) in fin, define the mapping A(z,t) on
en x e by
2

(7) A(z,t)(w, 0-) = (W+Z,0-+t+ilzI +2i

i WjZj).

J=l

generate Hn(Z). Indeed, if k and [lie in zn and m
lies in Z, then (k, 1, m) is the same as the product

(4)

n

Iw + zI 2 = IwI 2+ 2Re L WjZj + Iz1 2,

k bh
akl
••• ann
1 . .. bI;c m
1

in the group, where of course this expression is
interpreted using the group operation.
For i,j = 1, ... , n we have that
642

Because

j=l

one can check that A(z,t)(w,O") E 'U n+ 1 when
(w, cr) E l1 n+ 1 and A(z,t)(w, cr) E ol1 n+ 1 when
(w,O") E OVn+l' Also,

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

are the complex-linear transformations on e n + 1
which map the unit ball onto itself, which is the
same as saying that they preserve the standard
Hermitian inner product on e n + 1 .
Tube Domains and Spaces of Holomorphic
Functions on Them
Let m be a positive integer, and let B be a nonempty
open subset of R m • The corresponding tube
domain TB in em is defined by

A(z,t)(A(z',t')(W, a))

=

(w + z' +
+ 2;

2
2
Z, if + t' + t + ; 1Z' 1 + ; 1Z 1

i. z) + 2; i.
Wj

j=l

=

(w + z' +
+ 2;

(Wj + z)) Zj )

j=l
2

Z, if + t' + t + ; 1Z' 1

i.

Wj (z) + Zj) + 2;

j=l

=

(w + z' +
+ 2;

+ ; I Z 12

i. z)

Z, if + t' + t + ;Iz' + zI

i.

Wj (z) + Zj) -

21m

j=l

=

1Z

if

+ 2;

i.

TB == {z E em: z == x + iy, x E Rm,y E B}.

2

i. z]

Zj )

j=l

(w + + z' , + t + t' + ; +
Z

Zj )

j=l

2
Z' 1

Wj (Zj + z)) + 2 1m

j=l

i. z])
Zj

j=l

== A(z,t)o(z',t')(w, a).

In particular, A(-z,-t) is the inverse of A(z,t). It follows
that A(z,t) defines a one-to-one mapping of l1 n + 1
onto itself.
From the definition of A(z,t) it is clear that A(z,t)
is a holomorphic mapping, and in fact a complexaffine mapping, since there are only w's and a's
in A(z,t)(w, a) and none of their complex conjugates. Thus A(z,t) is in fact a biholomorphic mapping
of 'U n + 1 onto itself.
Define 8r : fin -- fin for r > 0 by
f'J

2

8 r (z, t) == (r z, r t).
As before, 8r is a one-to-one mapping of fin onto
itself which preserves the group structure on fin,
8r o8r , == 8rr , for all r, r' > 0, and 8r is the identity
mapping on fin exactly when r == 1. These dilations
also correspond to mappings on l1 n + 1 in a natural
way. Namely, define ~r : l1 n + 1 -- l1 n + 1 for r > 0 by

(8)
It is easy to see that ~r is a one-to-one mapping of
l1 n+ 1 onto itself which takes 'U n+ 1 to l1 n+ 1 and
that ~r 0 ~s == ~rs for all r, S > 0 and ~l is the identity mapping. Furthermore, ~r is a biholomorphic
mapping of l1 n + 1 onto itself, and
~r(A(z,t)(w, a)) == A8r(z,t)(~r(w, a)).

A famous fact about l1 n + 1 is that it is biholomorphically equivalent to the unit ball in e n+ 1 •
Thus the A(z,t)'s and ~r's correspond to biholomorphic transformations on the unit ball in e n+ 1 .
They do not account for all of the biholomorphic
transformations, though; basically what is missing

JUNE/JULY 2003

We shall be interested in complex-valued functions
F(z) on TB which are holomorphic, which is to say
that F(z) can be represented in a neighborhood of
each point W E TB by a power series that uses only
factors of the form (Zj - Wj) and not their complex
conjugates. If F(z) is a function on TB which admits
a power series representation around each point
W E TB that uses both the factors (Zj - Wj) and
their complex conjugates, then F(z) is said to
be real-analytic. Of course real-analyticity can be
defined directly on real Euclidean spaces, using
standard power series expansions, and that definition is equivalent to this one for functions on
open subsets of em .
A real-analytic function vanishes on a neighborhood of some point if and only if the function
and all of its derivatives are equal to 0 at that point.
Using this, one can check that if a real-analytic
function on a connected domain vanishes on a nonempty open subset, then the function vanishes
everywhere on the domain. We shall make the
standing assumption that the bases B of our tube
domains are connected, so that the corresponding
tube domain is also connected.
Fix a point y in B, and consider the subset
R m + i Y of TB consisting of points of the form
x + i y, X E R m • If F(z) is a holomorphic function
on TB , then F(z) is uniquely determined by its
restriction to R m + i y. This is equivalent to saying
that if F(z) is holomorphic on TB and vanishes on
Rm + i y, then F(z) vanishes on all of TB • Indeed, if
F(z) vanishes on Rm + i y, then the derivatives of
F(z) in the Rm directions on R m + i Y vanish, and
for a holomorphic function this implies that the
derivatives in all directions vanish on R m + i y. In
other words, the power series coefficients of F(z)
at points in R m + i Y all vanish, so that F(z) vanishes
on a neighborhood of Rm + i y. In particular, F(z)
vanishes on a nonempty open subset of TB and
hence on all of TB , as in the previous paragraph.
Thus one can identify holomorphic functions
on TB with a special class of functions on R m + i y.
Just as the mth Heisenberg group acts by linear
operators on functions on R m, as indicated before,
it also acts on holomorphic functions· on TB • For
each fixed ~ in R m, the mapping z ..... z - ~ takes TB
onto itself, and this leads to the linear operator

NOTICES OF THE AMS

643

F(z) 1-+ F(z - ~) acting on functions on TB , which

takes holomorphic functions to holomorphic functions. If we fix a positive real number A, then for
each 11 in R m we get a complex exponential

(9)

exp ( 2rrii\

f.

Zj 1Jj )

J=l

which defines a holomorphic function on all of
em. Multiplication by this exponential function
defines a linear operator on functions on TB , and
it takes holomorphic functions to holomorphic
functions, because the exponential function is
holomorphic. Just as before, the translation operators and the operators of multiplication by these
complex exponentials do not quite commute, the
commutators between them being scalar multiples
of the identity, and again we get homomorphic
images of the mth Heisenberg group.
As in Chapter III of [21], one defines the Hardy
space J-{2(TB ) to be the vector space of holomorphic functions F(z) on TB such that

r IF(x + i y)\2 dx

(10)

JRm

is finite for all y E B and in fact uniformly bounded.
The norm IIFIIJf2(TB) is defined by

IIFII~2(T ) = sup
f IF(x + i yW dx.
yEB JRm
B

This space and its norm are preserved by the translation operators F(z) F(z - ~), ~ E R m. In order
for multiplication by the complex exponentials
(9) to take J-{2(TB ) to itself for all 11 E R m, it is
necessary and sufficient for B to be bounded,
which ensures that the complex exponentials are
bounded functions on TB • On each slice of the form
R m + i y, the modulus of the complex exponential
(9) is equal to exp(-2rry ·11), which is constant
on the slice. Thus if one multiplies F(z) by (9), then
(10) is multiplied by exp(-4rry ·11). This is more
complicated than a translation in the R m direction, since this factor depends on y as well as on 11 .
Elements of the Hardy space have a nice Fouriertransform representation. Namely, F(z) lies in
J-{2(TB ) if and only if F(z) can be expressed as

by exponentials, and multiplications of F(z) by
complex exponentials (9) correspond to translations
of f(u).
It is a classical result that if B is a connected open
subset of R m and B denotes the convex hull of B,
then every holomorphic function on TB admits a
holomorphic extension to TB. See Theorem 9 in
Chapter V of [4]. In fact B is convex if and only if
TB is a domain of holomorphy, which basically
means that there is not some universal holomorphic extension of holomorphic functions on TB to
a connected region that intersects TB but is not
contained in TB • See Theorem 3.5.1 in [15], for instance. For an element of J-{2(TB ), one can also get
this holomorphic extension from the preceding
Fourier-transform representation, and, moreover,
the Hardy-space norm of the extension is equal to
the Hardy-space norm of the original function on
the original domain. This is Corollary 2.4 on p. 93
of [21]. Note that for a nonempty convex open subset B of Rm, J-{2(TB ) contains a function which is
not identically 0 if and only if B does not contain
a line, as in Corollary 2.6 on p. 94 of [21].
Let us now consider the case of convex cones.
Recall that a subset f of R m is said to be a convex
cone if t v E f whenever v E f and t is a positive real
number, and v + W E [whenever v, W E [. We shall
assume as well that [ is nonempty and an open
subset of Rm and that it does not contain 0, since
otherwise f would be all of R m. The dual f* of [is
defined by

1-+

(11)
F(z) =

Im exp( 2rri ~ Uj)
Zj

f(u)du,

Z E TEl

where f(u) is a measurable function on R m such that
(12)

sup
yEB

r If(u)1 exp(-4rry . u)du <
2

JRm

00.

Furthermore, IIFII~2(TB) is equal to the quantity in
(12) in this case. See [21, p. 93]. As usual, translations of F(z) correspond to multiplications of f(u)
644

[* = {u E R m : v · u ~ 0 for all v E [}.

It is easy to see that f* is always a convex cone that
is a closed subset of R m.
Note that [* is equal to the set of u in R m such
that exp(2rriz . u) is a bounded function of z on
the tube Tr over [, and indeed

I exp2rriz· ul ~ 1
for all u E [* and z in Tr. Now consider the Hardy
space J-{2(Tr ). Because [is unbounded, multiplication by the complex exponential (9) does not
send J-{2(Tr ) to itself for arbitrary 11 in R m, but this
is true when 11 is an element of the dual cone f*.
More precisely, if F(z) is an element of J-{2(Tr ) and
11 lies in f*, then the Hardy-space norm of F(z)
times the exponential function (9) is less than or
equal to the Hardy-space norm of F(z) itself.
For a tube over a convex cone, the Fouriertransform representation of elements of the
Hardy space can be converted into the following.
A function F(z) lies in J-{2(Tr ) if and only if it can
be expressed as
F(z) =

r exp(2rriz· u) f(u) du,

Jr*

where f(u) is a measurable function on f* such that

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

r If(u)1 du <
2

(13)

Jr*

00.

In this case IIFII~2CTr) is equal to the quantity in (13).
This is Theorem 3.1 on p. 101 of [21]. Let us
emphasize that the integrals over f* are taken with
respect to m-dimensional volume measure. If f
contains a line so that the closure of [ contains a
line, through the origin, then f* is contained in a
subspace of R m of dimension strictly less than m
and the integrals over f* are automatically equal
to O.
A tube over a cone Tr is invariant not only under
the translations z Z - ~, ~ E R m , but also under
the dilation mappings z r z, where r is a positive
real number. If F(z) lies in J{2(Tr ), then F(r z) also
lies in J-(2(Tr ), and the norm of F(r z) is equal to
r- m / 2 times the norm of F(z). More generally, if 1J is
an invertible linear mapping from R m onto itself
such that 1J([) = [, then the extension <I> of 1> to a
complex-linear mapping on em defines a biholomorphic automorphism of Tr . Composition with
these mappings <I> defines linear operators on
J-(2(Tr ), in which the norm is multiplied by the
square root of the reciprocal of the absolute value
of the determinant of 1>. For some special cones [,
there may be quite a lot of these linear symmetries.
A basic example is the cone consisting of the
elements v of R m such that each component Vj of
v is a positive real number. A linear mapping on
R m takes this cone to itself if and only if the
matrix of the linear mapping in the standard basis
has nonnegative entries and each row in the
matrix contains at least one positive entry. In particular, this cone is homogeneous, which is to say
that for every two elements v and W in the cone
there is an invertible linear mapping on R m which
takes the cone to itself and which takes v to w. Note
that the dual of this cone consists of the elements
u of R m such that each component Uj of U is a
nonnegative real number.
The domain l1 n + 1 defined in (6) is not a tube
domain but nonetheless enjoys remarkable structure which is somewhat similar. This includes a
large family of biholomorphic automorphisms
given by affine mappings, namely those generated
by the Acz,t)'s defined in (7) and the nonisotropic
dilations ~r defined in (8). The Hardy space
J{2(l1 n + 1 ) associated to l1 n + 1 is defined as the
space of holomorphic functions F(w, a) on l1 n + 1
such that
1-+

1-+

(14)

r r IF(w,r+i\wI +is)1 dwdr

JR Jc n

2

2

is finite for every positive real number s and uniformly bounded. The norm IIFIIJf2C'Un +1) is defined
to be the square root of the supremum of (14) over
s > O. Compare with [20, p. 532]. For any holomorphic function on l1 n + 1 , one can compose with

JUNE/JULY 2003

an affine mapping ACz,t) or a dilation ~r and get
another holomorphic function on l1 n + 1 • If the
initial function lies in the Hardy space J{2(l1 n + 1 ) ,
then one can check that the same is true after
composition. Composition with the Acz,t)'s does
not change the Hardy-space norm, while composition with the dilations ~r changes the norm by a
scale factor. In other words, the Heisenberg group
again acts on the Hardy space, but this time one
uses only compositions and not multiplications
by exponentials. Concerning these and related
matters, see [15], [19], [20].
In short, several complex variables, classical
Fourier analysis, and Heisenberg groups are interweaved in a number of ways, with various domains,
spaces of functions, and actions on them.
Some Geometric Aspects
As on any Lie group, one can define left-invariant
smooth Riemannian metrics on the Heisenberg
group by choosing any inner product on the tangent
space at the identity element and then extending
that to the whole group through left translations.
In other words, the inner product on the tangent
space at a point p is determined by using a left
translation to move p to the identity element and
using the differential of this translation mapping
to transport tangent vectors at p to tangent vectors
at the identity, where the inner product has been
specified.
On the Heisenberg groups, as well as other
nilpotent Lie groups, one has the extra ingredient
of dilations. On any Riemannian manifold one can
scale the metric simply by multiplying it by a positive real number, but with the dilations one can
make a different kind of scaling, using the dilations
as a change of variables.
On R n with the standard Euclidean metric, these
two kinds of scaling have the same effect on the
metric. This is not the case on the Heisenberg
groups or other nonabelian nilpotent Lie groups.
Let,us briefly describe two very interesting aspects
of this.
As mentioned earlier, one can take the quotient
of Hn(R) by the subgroup Hn(Z) to get a smooth
compact manifold. Since we are considering leftinvariant metrics on Hn(R) , let us agree to take the
quotient of Hn(R) by the action of the subgroup
Hn(Z) on the left as well. This permits us to get
Riemannian metrics on the quotient from leftinvariant metrics on Hn(R). Using the dilations,
one can show that the quotient space admits
Riemannian metrics such that the maximum of the
absolute values of the sectional curvatures is
bounded by 1 at the same time that the diameter
is as small as one likes. This is equivalent to saying that there are metrics such that the diameter
is bounded by 1 and the maximum of the absolute
values of the sectional curvatures is as small as one

NOTICES OF THE AMS

645

likes. For more about this kind of phenomenon, see
[6], [7], [12].

In addition to left-invariant Riemannian metrics, one can consider sub-Riemannian geometry.
For this one specifies a family of subspaces of the
tangent spaces to a given manifold and measures
distances between points by taking lengths of
curves where the curves are restricted to have their
tangent vectors in the specified subspaces of the
tangent spaces. Of course the family of subspaces
of the tangent spaces has to satisfy certain properties in order for there to be such a curve between
any two points. In the case of the Heisenberg group
Hn(R) , such a family of subspaces of the tangent
spaces can be obtained as follows. At the identity
element (0, 0, 0) the tangent space can be identified
with the vector space Rn x R n x R in a natural way,
and for the subspace one takes R n x R n x {O}. At
other points one gets a subspace of the tangent
space by making a left translation to reduce to
this subspace of the tangent space at the identity
element. This leads to a family of subspaces of the
tangent spaces which satisfies the condition just
mentioned, and it is also invariant under left translations as well as the dilations on the Heisenberg
group.
In the context of the domain l1 n + 1 in en + 1 defined
in (6), one can look at this in a slightly different
way. Namely, in the boundary ol1 n+ 1 , one can
choose the family of subspaces of the tangent
spaces to be the maximal complex subspaces. These
are preserved by the mappings A(z,t) and the dilations ~r discussed before, because these
mappings take ol1 n + 1 to itself and they preserve
the complex structure.
Two very good references concerning subRiemannian geometry in general are [2] and [17].
One might be surprised at the extent to which
familiar and basic topics from advanced calculus
become quite tricky in the sub-Riemannian case
and for which there are a lot of open questions. In
this regard, see [16].

[7] J. CHEEGER, K. FUKAYA, and M. GROMOV, Nilpotent structures and invariant metrics on collapsed manifolds,
]. Amer. Math. Soc. 5 (1992),327-372.
[8] L. EHRENPREIS, Fourier Analysis in Several Complex
Variables, Wiley, 1970.
[9] J. FARAUT and A. KoRANYI, Analysis on Symmetric Cones,
Oxford University Press, 1994.
[10] J. FARAUI, S. KANEYUKI, A. KoRANYI, Q. Lu, and G. Roos,
Analysis and Geometry on Complex Homogeneous
Domains, Birkhauser, 2000.
[11] G. FOLLAND, Harmonic Analysis in Phase Space, Ann.
of Math. Stud., vol. 122, Princeton University Press,
1989.
[12] M. GROMOV, Almost flat manifolds, ]. Differential
Geom. 13 (1978),231-241.
[13] R. HOWE, On the role of the Heisenberg group in
harmonic analysis, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.) 3
(1980), 821-843.
[14] A. KoRANYI and H. REIMANN, Foundations for the theory
of quasiconformal mappings on the ffeisenberg group,
Adv.Math.lll (1995),1-87.
[15] S. KRANTz, Function Theory of Several Complex Variables, second ed., AMS Chelsea Publishing, 2001.
[16] V. MAGNANI, Elements of Geometric Measure Theory
on Sub-Riemannian Groups, thesis, Scuola Normale
Superiore, Pisa, 2002.
[17] R. MONTGOMERY, A Tour of Subriemannian Geometries, Their Geodesics and Applications, Math. Surveys
Monogr., vol. 91, Arner. Math. Soc., 2002.
[18] W. RUDIN, Functional Analysis, second ed., McGrawHill, 1991.
[19] __ , Function Theory in the Unit Ball of
SpringerVerlag, 1980.
[20] E. STEIN, Harmonic Analysis: Real-Variable Methods,
Orthogonality, and Oscillatory Integrals, Princeton
University Press, 1993.
[21] E. STEIN and G. WEISS, Introduction to Fourier Analysis on Euclidean Spaces, Princeton University Press,
1971.
[22] M. TAYLOR, Noncommutative Harmonic Analysis, Math.
Surveys Monogr., vol. 22, Arner. Math. Soc., 1986.
[23] W. THURSTON, Three-Dimensional Geometry and Topology, S. Levy, ed., Princeton University Press, 1997.
[24] S. VAGI, Harmonic analysis on Cartan and Siegel domains, in Studies in Harmonic Analysis, MAA Stud.
Math., vol. 13, Math. Assoc. America, 1976, pp.
257-309.
[25] E. VESENTINI, Invariant metrics on convex cones, Ann.
Scuola Norm. Sup. Pisa C1. Sci. (4) 3 (1976), 671-696.

en,

References
[1] R. BEAlS and P. GREINER, Calculus on Heisenberg manifolds, Ann. Math. Stud. 119, Princeton University
Press, 1988.
[2] A. BELLAICHE and ].-J. RISLER, eds., Sub-Riemannian
Geometry, Birkhauser, 1996.
[3] C. BERENSTEIN, D.-C. CHANG, and J. TIE, Laguerre Calculus and Its Applications on the Heisenberg Group,
Arner. Math. Soc. and Internat. Press, 2001.
[4] S. BOCHNER and W. MARTIN, Several Complex Variables,
Princeton University Press, 1948.
[5] A. BROWN and C. PEARCY, Structure of commutators of
operators, Ann. ofMath. (2) 82 (1965), 112-127.
[6] P. BUSER and H. KARCHER, Gromov's almost flat manifolds, Asterisque 81 (1981).

646

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

The Moduli Space of

Curves and Its
Tautological Ring
RaviVakil

_ . .,.....he moduli space of curves has proven
itself a central object in geometry. The
past decade has seen substantial progress
in understanding the moduli space of
curves, involving ideas, for example, from
geometry (algebraic, symplectic, and differential),
physics, topology, and combinatorics. Many of the
new ideas are r~lated to the tautological ring of the
moduli space, a subring of the cohomology (or
Chow) ring that (i) seems highly structured, and (ii)
s,eems to include all the geometrically natural
classes.
The goal of this article is to give the reader an
introduction to the moduli space of curves and
some intuition for its behavior. We do this by focusing on its tautological ring and in particular on
its beautiful (ombinatorial structure. As motivation
we consider the prototypical example of a moduli
space, that of the Grassmannian (parameterizing
k-dimensional subspaces of an n-dimensional
vector space). Its cohomology ring has an elegant
structure, and Mumford suggested studying the
moduli ~pace of curves in the same way. We introduce the moduli space of (genus g, n-pointed)
curves, with enough information to give a feel for
its basic geography. We next introduce the tautological cohomology (or Chow) classes. Finally, we
describe some of what is known about the tautoRavi Vakil is assistant professor of mathematics at Stanford University. His email address is vaki l@math.

stanford. edu.
His wotk was supported in part by NSF grant DMS-0098769,
an AMS Centennial Fellowship, and an Alfred P. Sloan
Research Fellowship.

JUNE/JULY 2003

logical ring, emphasizing combinatorial aspects.
We will assume as little as possible, although some
notions from geometry and topology will be used.
The selection of material is, of course, a personal one, and there are necessarily omissions of
important work. However, we hope that enough
has been given for the reader new to the field to
appreciate the deep structure of this important
geometrical object. For the expert we hope that
the view will be a refreshing one with perhaps
some combinatorial surprises. Many important
recent developments in this highly interdisciplinary field are beyond the scope of this article. For
example, the most exciting news in recent times is
Madsen and Weiss's proof of Madsen's generalization of Mumford's conJecture, based on earlier
work of Madsen and Tillmann; the methods are
topological and singularity-theoretic. Other relevant fields include Teichmillier theory, geometric
topology, conformal field theory, and arithmetic
geometry (Grothendieck's qessins d'enfants). Even
within algebraic geometry, this discussion leaves
out important. recent work of Farkas, GibneyKeel-Morrison, and many others.
We will use the algebro-geometric language of
schemes, but re(;lders should feel free to interpret
these loosely as a certain type of (ringed, topologthink instead in their category
ical) space and
of choice (such as algebraic varieties, analytic
spaces, manifolds, topological spaces, etc.). ·All
dimensions,'will be complex (= algebraic), not real,
unless otherwise specified.
The perspective here on moduli spaces is that of
Grothendieck"Mumford,and Deligne. The highlights

NOTICES OF THE AMS

to

647

discussed are informed most heavily by the books
of Arbarello, Cornalba, Griffiths, Harris, and Morrison, and by work of Faber, Getzler, Looijenga,
Pandharipande, Pikaart, and others. In particular,
the author is deeply grateful to Joe Harris for
teaching him how to think about this beautiful
subject. Suggestions from D. M. Jackson and many
others have greatly improved the exposition of
this article.

Prototypical Example of a Moduli Space:
The Grassmannian
A moduli space is, informally, a parameter space
for a certain type of object. This is best understood in terms of a prototypical example, that of
the Grassmannian.
Fix a dimension n vector space ([n . (We work over
the complex numbers for convenience. However,
the construction works over an arbitrary base field
and in much greater generality.) The Grassmannian G(k, n) is the set of dimension k subspaces of
([n. If V is a dimension k subspace, denote the corresponding point of G(k, n) by [V]. The Grassmannian clearly has more structure than just that
of a set; for example, there is an intuitive notion
of "nearby k-spaces", so G(k, n) should be a topological space. There is a natural way to give G(k, n)
the structure of a manifold (and indeed the structtlre of a variety), as follows.
Fix k general subspaces of dimension n - k + 1,
WI, ... , Wk. "Most" dimension k subspaces V intersect each Wi in a one-dimensional subspace (Le.
a point of [J»Wi ). Conversely, for "most" choices of
[-f\] E [J»WI , ... , [-8 k ] E [J»Wk, the-8i arelinearlyindependent and hence span a k -dimensional subspace
V, and V n Wi = -8 i for all i. Thus we have given a
"large subset" of G(k, n) the structure of a complex
manifold (or a smooth variety). The choice of a
different k-tuple (Wi)lsisk will give a different large
subset. One may quickly check that these subsets
cover G(k, n) and that the manifold (or algebraic)
structures are compatible. Hence G(k, n) is a complex manifold and indeed a smooth complex algebraic variety. (Exercise: If k = 1, G(k, n) ~ [J»n-I as
manifolds and the "usual" cover by n affine spaces
([n-I is of the form described above.)
There is a "universal family" over G(k, n):
G(k, n) x ([n

U
(1)

IT t

/

G(k, n)

Here U is a complex algebraic variety, and IT is a
morphism (of varieties). Furthermore, IT-I[V] =
V C ([n. In fact, U is a vector bundle over G(k, n),
sometimes called the tautological bundle.
There is an explicit sense in which this algebraic structure on the set G(k, n) is the "right" one.
(This is the rigorous definition of a moduli space.)
A family of k-dimensional subspaces (of ([n)
648

p : V --+ B parameterized by a variety B induces a
map of sets B --+ G(k, n) (taking a point b E B to the
class of the fiber p-I(b)). This map of sets is in fact
an algebraic morphism. Moreover, the pullback of
the universal family U --+ G(k, n) to B by this morphism is our original family V --+ B. Hence we have
a bijection between the set of families of k-planes
parameterized by a variety B, and morphisms
B --+ G(k, n). This uniquely specifies the algebraic
structure on G(k, n). (Caveat: The notion of a "family of k-spaces parameterized by a base" needs to
be appropriately defined. The appropriate algebraic version of continuity of the family is "flatness".)
In short, we have defined G(k, n) in a categorical manner as follows. We have a "moduli functor"
that is a contravariant functor from the category
of varieties to the category of sets that takes a
variety B to the set of families Fam(B) of k-planes
parameterized by B. A morphism of varieties B' --+ B
induces a map of sets Fam(B) --+ Fam(B'): a family
over B pulls back to a family over B'. This functor
is isomorphic to another functor, sending B to
Hom(B, G(k, n)). However, we emphasize that the
Grassmannian can (and should) be thought of
rather concretely. A point of the Grassmannian
should be thought of as a k-plane; "nearby" points
of the Grassmannian should be thought of as
"nearby" k-planes in ([n.
Cohomology Classes of Moduli Spaces
If M is a moduli space of a certain kind of object
(or structure), then facts about M can be interpreted as universal statements about all families
of such objects. In particular, cohomology classes
of the moduli space are universal cohomology
classes. For example, the classifying space of rank
k complex vector bundles can be interpreted as a
moduli space M VB , and

(2)

where Xi has degree (Le. real codimension) 2i. Any
vector bundle V over a base B induces a map
B --+ M VB , and the pullback of Xi is the ith Chern
class Ci(V) of the bundle. Hence (2) can be interpreted as showing that the only universal cohomology classes (in the appropriate sense) coming
from vector bundles are Chern classes, and there
are no relations among the classes. (To make this
discussion precise in the algebraic category, one
needs the notion of Artin stacks.)
In analogy with Chern classes, the cohomology
ring of a moduli space parameterizing a certain kind
of object is of interest for many reasons, including the following:
(i) Specific questions about the objects in question can be reduced to calculations on the
moduli space.
(ii) To prove general facts about all families of
objects, it suffices to prove a specific fact

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

about a single (hopefully finite-dimensional)
space.
The cohomology ring of the Grassmannian has
a rich structure, connected to combinatorics, representation theory, and the theory of symmetric
functions. (See [Fu] for a detailed description.) We
observe first that G(k, n) is smooth and compact.
Hence we can associate cohomology classes with
their Poincare duals and will do so.
It is a fundamental fact that the cohomology ring
is generated (as a ring) by the Chern classes of a
naturally defined vector bundle on G(k, n): the universal family U - G(k, n) of (1).
A Specific Question: How Many Lines Meet Four
Given Lines in Three-Space?
An example of a specific question about k-planes
that can be reduced to calculations in H*(G(k, n))
is the following. Fix four general lines L l , L 2 , L 3 ,
L4 in ([3. How many lines meet all four? Because
this question is in some sense linear algebra, one
might suspect its answer to be 0, 1, or 00. In fact
it is 2. (The reader may enjoy showing this.)
This is a favorite question of many mathematicians, because they will all agree that it is the baby
case of an important idea. However, they won't
agree on what the important idea is! (Their answer
will depend on whether their primary interest is
linear algebra, geometry, topology, representation
theory of Sn and GL(n), Gromov-Witten theory and
quantum cohomology, combinatorics, symmetric
functions, or something else.)
This question can be reduced to intersection
theory on the Grassmannian as follows. Interpret
G(2,4) projectively as the space of projective lines
in projective three-space. It has (complex) dimension four. Given a fixed line L i in [p)3, the locus of
lines meeting L i is (complex) codimension 1. Let
D E H 2 (G(2, 4)) be the cohomology class corresponding to this locus. (In fact D = Cl(U*).) Then
this question translates to: compute D 4 •

The Moduli Space of n-Pointed Genus 9
Curves
We next apply the machinery of moduli spaces to
algebraic curves. (For a more detailed but still informal introduction, see [MirSym, Part 4]. For a
more complete introduction, see [HM]. For excellent summaries of recent research, see [HL] , [FL].)
We take smooth curves to be Riemann surfaces
(connected compact complex manifolds of dimension
1), although the following discussion applies over an
arbitrary field (and indeed over an arbitrary base
scheme). An n-pointed smooth curve is a smooth
curve with n distinctpoints labeled PI through Pn (or
perhaps 1 through n). (In real dimension 2, there is
a natural identification among: Riemannian structures up to scaling; conformal structures; almost
complex structures; complex structures; and complex
JUNE/JULY 2003

3

•

1

2

•

•

Figure 1. A 3-pointed genus 6 curve.

algebraic structures. These equivalences do not
hold for higher-dimensional spaces.)
The genus of a smooth curve is its genus as a surface. For example, Figure 1 is a 3-pointed genus 6
curve. Perhaps the best way to get a handle on a general genus 9 curve is as a high-degree branched cover
of the projective line [p)l. This was the perspective
of Riemann, and, perhaps surprisingly, many of the
results proved in the last decade involve understanding the moduli of curves in terms of branched
covers of [p)l.
Fix a genus 9 and a nonnegative integer n.
Exclude the cases (9, n) = (0,0), (0,1), (0,2), and
(1,0) for technical reasons that will be described
later; the cases (1,1) and (2,0) are also somewhat
special. Let :Jvlg,n be the set of smooth genus 9
n-pointed curves. (When n = 0, the notation:Jvl g is
often used.) As in the case of the Grassmannian,
Jvlg,n has additional structure. Unfortunately,
it cannot be given the structure of a complex
manifold or a variety. (More precisely: the moduli
functor is not representable in these categories.)
However, it can be given the structure of an orbifold
or, more precisely (to avoid vagaries of definition
of orbifold that cause problems with (1,1) and
(2,0)), a smooth Deligne-Mumford stack. The
general reader may think of Jvlg,n as a complex
manifold without going too far wrong; the main
caveat is that cohomology should be taken with «J2coefficients, not 7L -coefficients. In order to camouflage this issue, we will call Jvlg,n a "space". Note for
experts: Each point of an orbifold has an associated
finite group. For Jvlg,n the group corresponding to
the pointed curve (C, PI, ... , Pn) is the automorphism group of the pointed curve. If the group
is {e}, Jvlg,n is a manifold near that point. For example, most genus 3 curves have only the identity
automorphism, but the genus 3 hyperelliptic curve
given by the compactification of the locus in ([2

NOTICES OF THE AMS

649

Deligne and Mumford's Compactification :Mg,n of
3

•

:Mg,n

1

•

2

•

Figure 2. A 3-pointed genus 6 curve with three
nodes.
8

y2 = n(x - at)

(at "* a j for i "* j)

t=1

has a nontrivial automorphism (given by
(x, y)
(x, -y», and the curve
f-+

x 3 y + y3 Z + Z3 X = 0

in the projective plane has the most automorphisms of any genus 3 curve: 168. (Exercise: Find
them all!)
We will need one fact about :Mg,n. Remarkably,
in some sense it was known to Riemann.
Fact 1. The space :Mg,n is smooth and irreducible
(Le. connected), of dimension 3g - 3 + n.
The geometry of this space is rather subtle,
and very few general statements are known. One
example which is elementary to state is the following. Any complex curve of genus at most 10 can
be arbitrarily well approximated by a rationally
definable curve (Le. one defined over <Q, described
by equations with rational coefficients). However,
an appropriate generalization of a conjecture of
Lang would imply that in genus at least 24, the set
of such curves has measure O. (This follows from
three facts: (i) rationally definable curves correspond to rational points of :M g ; (ii) :M g is "unirational" for g s 10; and (iii) :M g is of "general type"
for g ;;::: 24, a celebrated result of Harris, Mumford,
and Eisenbud.)
Another fact suggesting that the topology of
this space has some elegant structure is Harer and
Zagier's result that the (orbifold) Euler characteristic of :Mg,n is given by:
(3)

X(:Mg,n) = (-1)

n (2g + n -

3)!B 2g
2g(2g _ 2)!

if g > 0, where B2g denotes the 2gth Bernoulli number. (If g = 0, XC1Vl g ,n) = (_I)n+l(2g + n - 3)1.)
650

Deligne and Mumford [DM] introduced a compactification :Mg,n of the moduli space :Mg,n. The
additional points of the moduli space correspond
to nodal curves. The points of a nodal curve are
either smooth or analytically isomorphic to a
neighborhood of the origin of xy = 0 in ([2. The
curve is still required to be connected and compact.
An n-pointed nodal curve is a nodal curve with n
distinct smooth points labeled PI through Pn.
Informally, the arithmetic genus of a curve with
nodes is the genus of its smoothing. For example,
a smoothing of Figure 2 is Figure 1; hence Figure 2
has arithmetic genus 6. (Warning: The picture of
the nodes in Figure 2 is misleading, due to the difficulties of depicting a node in real two- or threedimensional space. In fact, at each node the two
branches are glued together transversely and are
not tangent.)
The geometric genus of a component of a nodal
curve is found by "ungluing" the nodes and finding the genus of the corresponding component. For
example, the components of the curve of Figure 2
.have genus 0, 2, and 3. '
To each nodal curve with labeled points we
associate a dual graph. Vertices correspond to
components; they are labeled with their geometric
genus. For each node we draw an edge joining the
appropriate vertices. For each marked point we
draw a "half-edge" incident to the appropriate
vertex, with the same label as the point. For example, the dual graph corresponding to Figure 2
is shown in Figure 3. (Combinatorial exercise: If a
nodal curve C has k components of geometric
genera gl, ... , gk, and 8 nodes, then the arithmetic
genus of C is I~I(gt - 1) + 1 + 8.)
A nodal curve is said to be stable if it has finite
automorphism group. This is equivalent to a combinatorial condition: (i) each genus 0 vertex of the
dual graph has valence at least three, and (ii) each
genus 1 vertex has valence at least one. For example, the curve of Figure 2 is stable.
Now let :Mg,n be the moduli space of n-pointed
genus g stable curves. (The reader may verify that,
as we have assumed (g, n) "* (1,0), one need only
check condition (i).)
Fact 2. The moduli space of stable curves :Mg,n is
a smooth, compact, irreducible space (DeligneMumford stack) of dimension 3g - 3 + n.
Moreover, the moduli space has a natural stratification.
Fact 3. :Mg,n is stratified by topological type or,
equivalently, by dual graph.
In other words, to each stable dual graph there
corresponds a stratum. For example, the stratum
given by Figure 3 consists of (points corresponding

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

to) all curves looking like Figure 2. To give such a
curve is the same as giving a 3-pointed genus 0
curve, a 3-pointed genus 2 curve, and a 3-pointed
genus 3 curve, and gluing them together as shown
in Figure 2. Thus this stratum is isomorphic to
.JvlO,3 x .Jvl 2,3 X .Jvl 3,3. In the same way, one may
show that each stratum is isomorphic to a product of moduli spaces of smooth pointed curves,
modulo a finite group. (For an example with a
nontrivial finite group: the stratum corresponding to the dual graph of Figure 4 is isomorphic
to the quotient of .Jvl 1 ,2 x .Jvl 1 ,2 X .Jvl 1 ,2 by the symmetric group 53.) In particular, the next fact
follows (after mild combinatorics) from the
first three.
Fact 4. The codimension of a stratum is the number of edges of the corresponding dual graph. .Jvlg,n
contains Mg,n as a dense open stratum. (The other
strata are called boundary strata.) The O-dimensional strata correspond to dual graphs where all
vertices are trivalent of genus O.
Examples: M O,3, M o,4, and MI,I
It is a straightforward fact that any three points
on !pI may be mapped to 0, 1, 00 by a unique automorphism of [p)1. Hence .JvlO,3 consists of a single
point. One may quickly check that the only stable
3-pointed genus 0 graph is the obvious one (with
one genus 0 vertex), so M O,3 is a point as well.
If PI, P2, P3, P4 are distinct points on [p)I, then the
automorphism of !pI of the previous paragraph
(sending the first three points to 0, 1, and 00
respectively) will send P4 to some number
i\ =1= 0,1,00. This map is the cross-ratio map
(P4 - PI)(P2 - P3)
(PI,P2,P3,P4) ..... i\ = (
)(
).
P4 - P3 P2 - PI

Hence .JvlO,4 ~ [p)I - {O, 1, 00 }. (In its modern guise
of the map to .JvlO,4, the lowly cross-ratio remains
an important tool in geometry.) The compactified
space MO,4 has three boundary strata, the last three
in Figure 5. In fact .JvlO,4 ~ [p)I; the reader should try
to associate the three boundary strata with the
three degenerate values (0, 1, 00) of i\. The three
boundary strata are trivially homologous, as they
are points on [p)I. This relation goes by many names;
we will refer to it as the cross-ratio relation.
The reader may check that no stable n-pointed
genus 0 curve has a nontrivial automorphism.

1

3

2~4

1

3

2

Figure 3. The dual graph corresponding to Figure 2.

1

Figure 4. The stratum corresponding to this graph is
isomorphic to (M I ,2 x M I ,2 x M I ,2) /53 •

Thus MO,n is a manifold (and indeed an algebraic
variety).
The space .JvlI,I parameterizes genus 1 curves
with a marked point, Le. elliptic curves. To each
elliptic curve is associated a j-invariant (a complex
number), and to each complex number there is an
associated elliptic curve with that j-invariant, so
.JvlI,I looks a lot like <C. However, MI,I is not a
manifold (as every elliptic curve has an involution,
so MI,I has nontrivial stack structure). In a concrete
sense, .JvlI,b not <C, is the right moduli space for
elliptic curves. For example, modular forms may be
interpreted as sections of line bundles on the space
.JvlI,I.

Natural Morphisms between Moduli Spaces of
Curves
There are natural morphisms between moduli
spaces of curves. For example, given an n-pointed
genus g curve (n > 0, (g, n) =1= (0,3), (1,1», one may
forget point Pn to obtain an (n - I)-pointed genus
g curve. Hence there is a forgetful morphism:

(4)
(Caution: When a point is forgotten, the resulting
curve may not be stable. However, there is a natural way to "stabilize" an unstable curve. Exercise:
If point P3 is forgotten in Figure 2, what should be
the resulting stable 2-pointed genus 6 curve?)
Also, given an (nl + I)-pointed genus gl curve
CI and an (n2 + I)-pointed genus g2 curve C2, one

1

2

3~4

Fig ure S. The strata of Mo,4.

JUNE/JULY 2003

NOTICES OF THE AMS

651

may glue one of the marked points of C1 to one of
the marked points of C2 to obtain a new curve C of
genus gl + g2 with nl + n2 marked points (two of
the previously labeled points have disappeared).
Similarly, given an (n + 2)-pointed genus g curve C,
one may glue two of the marked points of C together, obtaining a new curve of genus g + 1 with
n marked points. Hence we have gluing morphisms:
MgI,nl +1 X Mg2,n2+1 - M g1 +g2,nl +n2'
(5)

:Jvt.g,n+2 - :Jvt.g+l,n.

The gluing morphisms came up implicitly in our
earlier discussion of boundary strata as products
of smaller moduli spaces of curves.
Call the forgetful and gluing morphisms (4), (5)
the natural morphisms between moduli spaces of
curves.
The Tautological Ring
In algebraic geometry, rather than considering the
cohomology ring, we consider the algebraic version
of it, the Chow ring A *(Mg,n). The Chow groups are
generated by algebraic cycles. Relations in Chow
groups are generated by the atomic relation that
two points in tp>1 are "homologous" (the analogous
terminology in Chow is rationally equivalent; we
reserve the word "homologous" for cohomology)
and the condition that relations pull back and
push forward under appropriate morphisms. As
both the generators and relations of the Chow ring
are a subset of those of cohomology, there is a natural map A k - H 2k • (The index for Chow corresponds to algebraic (= complex) codimension, hence
its doubling in the map to cohomology.) Chow is
neither stronger nor weaker than cohomology. For
example, as the generators of Chow groups are algebraic and hence of even real dimension, Chow
groups do not see odd-graded cohomology. On the
other hand, two distinct points on a smooth curve
of positive genus are not equivalent in Chow, while
they are in homology. The reader may think instead
about cohomology, although some information
will be lost, as will be explained soon.
In some sense it appears that the Chow ring
A *(:Jvt.g,n) is not the right object to study. Instead,
attention has focused on a certain "tautological"
subring, denoted by R*(Mg,n) c A *(Mg,n), for three
admittedly vague reasons: (i) many interesting
questions in geometry boil down to the tautological subring; (ii) no natural questions seem to reduce
to questions in the nontautological part of the
Chow ring; and (iii) the tautological subring has, at
least conjecturally, a great deal of structure. For example, A *(:Jvt.g,n) is probably usually huge except
in special cases (see the discussion of :Jvt. I ,ll below).
R*(:Jvt.g,n) is much smaller.
However, in complex codimension 1, Arbarello
and Cotnalba showed, using results of Harer, that
652

the tautological ring is equal to the cohomology
ring.
As a first informal definition, R*(Mg,n) consists
of all the classes naturally coming from geometry.
By this "definition", any geometric calculation that
can be translated to the Chow ring will require
only knowledge of the tautological ring. (For all
example of how straightforward facts in the
tautological ring can lead to solutions of longstanding classical problems, see [V].) An easy
example of a class coming from geometry is the
class of a boundary stratum.
A second example of classes are Chern classes
of certain natural vector bundles on the moduli
space. For example, there are n natural line bundles
on :Jvt.g,n, denoted by [l1, ... , [In. The fiber of [li at the
point [C, PI, ... , Pn] E :Jvt.g,n is the (one-complexdimensional) cotangent space to C at Pi. Define
tJli = CI ([li); these are called the tJI-classes and will
be central players in the rest of this exposition.
Another natural vector bundle on :Jvt.g,n is the
Hodge bundle: to a smooth curve C one associates
the g-dimensional vector space of differentials.
This definition can be extended over the boundary,
giving a rank g vector bundle IE over Mg,n. Define
Ak = Ck(lE) (1 ~ k ~ g). These A-classes will come
up again later.
There are many other natural classes, including
the Miller-Morita-Mumford K-classes, Kl, K2, ...
(where Ki is codimension i). For brevity, we omit
their definition, although they will appear later in
Faber's conjecture. Mumford's original definition
of the tautological ring of :Jvt.g was in terms of
K-classes. The K-classes were also independently
defined by Morita and Miller.
The generalization of the tautological ring to
:Jvt.g,n is due to Hain and Looijenga. The following
description is due to Faber and Pandharipande.

Definition. The system of tautological rings
(R*(.1Yl g,n) c A * (.1Yl g,n)) g,n is the smallest system
of <Q -algebras satisfying:
(0 tJll,· . ~ , tJln E R*(:Jvt.g,n), and
(ii) the system is closed under pushforwards by
natural morphisms ((4) and (5)).

For example, the boundary strata are obtained by
pushing forward the fundamental class by glUing
morphisms (5). All other "natural" geometric classes
are in this ring, including A-classes, K-classes, and
pullbacks of tautological classes under natural
morphisms.

Definition. Define the tautological ring ofany open
subset of :Jvt.g,n by its restriction from :Jvt.g,n.
The striking (often conjectural) combinatorial
structure of the tautological ring comes in two related flavors:

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

A

B

~
.

C

A

D

C

~

B

A

D

D

B

~

C

Figure 6. The cross-ratio equivalences of boundary strata

4

13

13

4
7

Figure 7. An example of a cross-ratio equivalence (in M 2S )

• structure related to boundary strata (and hence
graphs); and
• structure of top intersections in the tautological ring, often called Hodge integrals; especially
top intersections of (/1 -classes.
Before describing what is known about these two
structures in arbitrary genus, we will first recapitulate what is known in low genus. In genus a the
structure is exceptionally elegant and combinatorial. In higher genus, odder behavior starts to
happen; examples often involve M1,11.
Genus Zero
The gluing morphisms (5) combined with the crossratio relation give equivalences among boundary
strata (in cohomology or Chow), depicted in Figure 6. In the figure, A, B, C, and D are taken to be
four "roots" of some fixed graph (possibly disconnected); see for example Figure 7. We will also
refer to these as cross-ratio relations.
Keel has proved that in genus a (for any number of
points), the cohomology and Chow groups are generated by boundary strata and that the relations are
generated by the cross-ratio relations. In particular,
H* = A */2 = R*/2. (In fact, the cohomology ring is
generated as an algebra by complex codimension 1
strata.) Multiplication of boundary strata in cohomology can be described combinatorially as well, so
the cohomology ring of MO,n has a beautiful combinatorial structure.
A different aspect of the combinatorial structure
of the cohomology/Chow/tautological ring of MO,n
is visible in terms of (/1 -classes:

f

a.( n - 3 ) .

(/11al ... (/1nn =

MO,n

al,···, an

We are using ordinary multiplication to represent
cup product. Define Ix y (where y E H 2i (X) or
Ai(X» to be the degree of y if i = dimX and to be
a otherwise. As dimMo,n = n - 3, Li ai must be
n - 3 in order to produce a a-cycle.

JUNE/JULY 2003

This result is even more beautiful in the language
of generating functions. Let
(6)

Eg,n =

L (f- t/J~1 ... t/J~n) tfl ... t~n

al, ...,an

3vl g ,n

where tl, ... , tn are formal variables. This is a homogeneous polynomial of degree dimMg,n =
3g - 3 + n. Then

(7)
Genus One: The Strange Case of M1,11
Before we discuss how well genus 1 is understood,
we begin with a pathology: M1,11. In genus a the
map A */2 -+ H* is an isomorphism. One blunt reason for A*/2(X) -+ H*(X) notto be an isomorphism
for a complex projective manifold X is if X has
odd cohomology: the algebraic classes are generated by algebraic (hence complex analytic) cycles
and hence are even-dimensional. (The Euler characteristic of the moduli space of curves may be negative by (3), so odd cohomology definitely arises.)
There is a more refined obstruction as well: Hodge
theory dictates that there is a subspace of the evendimensional cohomology where the algebraic cohomology must lie; we will call this the cohomology of Tate type.
The 22-real-dimensional space M1,11 has odd
cohomology, in its middle dimension. The existence
of this cohomology is a consequence of the
existence of a nonzero II-form on this
II-complex-dimensional space. (This uses the existence of the famous weight 12 modular form ~.)
Hence the natural map from the Chow ring of M1,n
to its cohomology ring H*(M1,n) cannot be a surjection for n = 11 and indeed for n ~ 11.
Also, the existence of this nonzero II-form
implies that Ao(M1,n) is huge (for n ~ 11): for
example, it is uncountably generated. (A more
precise statement and proof of this folklore fact appear in [GrVI].) As Ro(M1,n) (i.e. RdirnMl,n (M1,n» is
countably generated (indeed, one-dimensional; see

NOTICES OF THE AMS

653

below), we see that R O(.7Y1. l ,n) - AoCMl,n) cannot be
an isomorphism. On the other hand, for n s 10,
the maps R*/2(M I ,n) - A*/2(M I ,n) - H*(Ml,n) are
isomorphisms, by work of Belorousski.
Hence the cohomologyring has more information
than the Chow ring (for example, it has odd cohomology), and the Chow ring has more information
than the cohomology ring (for example, it canbetter
distinguishO-cycles). In genus 1 the tautological ring
is well understood and "better-behaved", in that it
sees neither of these two extra types ofinformation,
as we shall soon see.
As in genus 0, in genus 1 the tautological groups
are generated by boundary strata. (This follows
from the definition of the tautological ring using
tJI -classes and the fact that on Ml,n, tJli is rationally
equivalent to a sum of boundary strata.) Intersections between boundary strata are quite straightforward. There is a new relation in codimension 2
on M I,4 due to Getzler; the relation is complicated
and is omitted here. It is perhaps surprising that
this relation was not discovered earlier, given the
fact that M I,4 is a compact complex fourfold, parameterizing simple objects of long-standing interest (essentially, four points on an elliptic cUrve).
Furthermore, Getzler has announced that his relation and the cross-ratio relation generate all relations inR*(MI,n) and that the map from the tautological ring to the cohomology ring is an injection.
(More precisely, the map R*/2 - H* gives an isomorphism of the tautological ring with the even cohomology. As a consequence, for example, any
even-dimensional class is homologous to a tautological class.)
There is an analog to (7), involving the logarithm
of a certain generating function, divided by 24.
Genus Greater Than One
Starting in genus 2, the boundary strata do not generate the tautological ring: tJll on the threefold M 2 ,1
is not homologous to boundary strata. (This is in some
sense the only example in genus 2 of this behavior;
all others are derived from this via the gluing morphism.) The Chow ring of :Jvl 2 ,n is known for, small
n, but many open questions remain. Belorousski
and Pandharipande have proved· a new relation in
codimension 2 on :Jvl 2 ,3. Polito showed in her thesis
that there are no additional codimension 2 relations
for Mg,n, but surely there are more to be found in
higher codimension. An explicit algebraic cycle,
not homologous to a tautological class, defined
over (Q, was found on :Jvl 2 ,22 by Graber and
Pandharipande; it is the first in a family of examples, and its construction uses MI,ll.
In genus greater than 2 the full Chow ring is
well understood in a few cases, including: A *(M3)
(work of Faber; it contains only tautological
elements), A *(:Jvl 4 ) ~ (Q[AI]/(Ar) (Faber again), and
A*(M s) ~ (Q[Al]/(Af) (work of Izadi combined with
work of Faber). Pikaart has shown that for large 9
654

(for given n), the cohomology of Mg,n is not all of
Tate type and hence not all algebraic (let alone
tautological); his argument involves :Jvl1,11. There
is also a higher-genus version of (7), given by a
"genus-expansion" ansatz of the physicists Itzykson and Zuber.

The Tautological Ring in Arbitrary Genus:
Top Intersections of tJI-Classes
The reason for interest in top intersections of
tJI -classes is that knowing these values allows us
to find the top intersections of any classes in the
tautological ring by appropriately unwinding the
definition of the tautological ring. (Based on his
earlier work, Faber has written a remarkable Maple
program that will explicitly perform intersections
of many different types of classes in the tautological ring [F2].) Furthermore, these top intersections
of (jJ -classes have a striking structure which allows
them to be computed, using Witten's conjecture or
Hurwitz numbers. (Note added in proof:
K. Costello's thesis gives a beautiful third combinatorial description of these top intersections.)
Witten's conjecture (proved by Kontsevich and
later by Okounkov and Pandharipande) was the
catalyst for much of the interest in the tautological ring in recent years. (See [L] for a detailed
exposition.) Define Fg by
Fg :=

2: ~n. 2: (f- t/J~l ... t/J~n)

n;;::O

kl, ...,k n

Mg,n

tkl ••• tk

n,

the generating function for all top intersections of
tJI-classes in genus g. (Compare this to (6).) Define
a generating function for all such intersections in
all genera by

This is Witten's free energy or the Gromov-Witten
potential of a point. For convenience, we will set
A = 1.

Witten's conjecture (Kontsevich's Theorem) gives
a recursion for top intersections of (jJ -classes in the
form of a partial differential equation satisfied by F.
Using this differential equation along with a straightforward geometric fact known as the string equation
and the trivial fact (the "initial condition") JMO,3 1 = 1
(as M O,3 is a point), all top intersections are quickly
recursively determined.
Witten's Conjecture (Kontsevich's Theorem).

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

Kontsevich's proof of Witten's conjecture is
by combinatorializing these top inters,ections,
expressing them in terms of sums over "ribbongraphs". Okounkov and Pandharipande's more
recent proof is by way of Hurwitz numbers, which
is a second way of combinatorializing top intersections of (/J ~classes and is described below.
Witten's conjecture indicates a deep connection
between moduli spaces such as these and integrable systems. This link is still mysterious. Another
link to integrable systems is via the Virasoro Lie
algebra. Dijkgraaf, Verlinde, and Verlinde showed
that Witten's conjecture (along with the string
equation) implies that eF is annihilated by a
sequence of differential operators L_ 1 , L o, L 1 , ... ,
corresponding to part of the Virasoro algebra. The
first differential equation I-I eF = 0 is the string
equation, and the second is geometrically obvious,
but the geometric meaning of the rest is obscure.
One of the fundamental open questions in GromovWitten theory is a generalization of this formulation of Witten's conjecture and deals with maps
of curves to an arbitrary (smooth projective) target
manifold: the Virasoro conjecture (due to the
physicists Eguchi, Hori, and Xiong, as well as
S. Katz). This question has recently been settled
in two important open cases: that of projective
spaces (by Givental) and that of smooth curves (by
Okounkov and Pandharipande).
Hurwitz Numbers
Another combinatorial description of top intersections of (jJ -classes, which has been alluded to
above, is via Hu'rwitz numbers. Hurwitz numbers
count, essentially, ordered factorizations of a
permutation into transpositions, and these factorizations may be regarded as combinatorial
objects. More precisely, fix a positive integer d, a
nonnegative integer r, and a conjugacy class of Sd
given by a partition a (Le., al + ... + an = d).
Define g by 2 - 2g = d + n - r. Then define
(8)

fI~ = # { (J'l,"

. , (J'r E tran(Sd) :
(J'l . . . (J'r E

C(a) } / d!

where tran(Sd) is the set of transpositions in Sd
(elements of the form (ij)), and C(a) c Sd is the
conjugacy class corresponding to a.
This number can be interpreted as the answer
to a problem in enumerative geometry, as follows.
Fix r + 1 distinct points {PI, ... , Pr, oo} on the
sphere, interpreted as the complex projective line
([ ~l, and count the number of degree d covers of
the sphere, unbranched away from the r + 1 points,
with the simplest possible branching above each
of the first r points (Le. two of the sheets come together, analytically the projection of the parabola
y2 = X to the x -axis in ([2; the remaining d - 2
sheets are unbranched) and with branching above

JUNE/JULY 2003

00 given by a. Then the cover also has a complex
structure by the Riemann existence theorem and
hence is a Riemann surface, although possibly with
many components.
Define the Hurwitz number H~ as the number
of such covers where the cover has one component.
In this case, the covering curve has genus g. The
analog in (8) is to require that the (J't generate Sd.
Equivalently, if one constructs a graph with vertices
labeled 1 through d and draws an edge between
j and k if (J't = (j k), then this "monodromy graph"
must be connected. The simplest way to describe
the relationship between the numbers H& and Hrx
is to construct generating functions Hand H for
these numbers in a straightforward way; then
H = eH •
Hurwitz numbers were first studied by Hurwitz.
In recent times, they have been studied by combinatorialists, representation theorists, physicists,
the Arnol'd school of geometers, symplectic and
algebraic geometers interested in Gromov-Witten
theory, and more. For a summary of this rich
history, see [ELSV], [GN] .
Hurwitz numbers are obviously easy to compute.
If you play with them for a while, you may soon
come to the following conjecture:
For fixed g and n,

(9)

H~= #Autr !( ) (fraf;)p(al,
... ,an)
t=1
(X

(X"

where P is some mysterious symmetric polynomial of total degree between 2g - 3 + nand
3g - 3 + n. This conjecture is a baby form of a
much more sophisticated polynomiality conjecture of the combinatorialists Goulden and Jackson
that can be interpreted as a "structure theorem"
for Hurwitz numbers. The number 3g - 3 + n is
extremely suggestive: it is the dimension of Mg,n.
There is indeed a genus g curve with n marked
points in the picture: the cover has genus 9 and has
n pre-images over 00.
Equation (9) is explained by the following remarkable formula:
Theorem (The IIELSV formula"; Ekedahl, Lando,
Shapiro, and Vainshtein).
(10)

P(al, ... ,an) =

f
-

J'vlg,n

l-Al+···+(-I)gAg
)
(
).
- al (jJI ... 1 - an(jJn

(1

The right side should be interpreted as follows: formally invert the denominator, expand everything
out, and keep only the terms of codimension
dimMg,n = 3g - 3 + n. Hence for fixed g and n,

NOTICES OF THE AMS

655

P( lXI,···, lXn ) =

~

L

kl k2
kn
lX I lX2 • . . lXn

kl + ... +k n + j=3g-3+n
O~j~g

immediately identifying the mysterious polynomial P. Note in particular that the highest-degree
portion of P is a generating function for top intersections of l/J -classes (and is, upon replacement of
lXi by ti, eq. (6)). This gives a straightforward way
of computing these abstractly defined numbers: it
is not hard to recover the coefficients of a polynomial P of known degrees by computing enough
values, and Hurwitz numbers are easy to compute.
Hence, remarkably, the combinatorics of the symmetric group lead inexorably to the tautological
ring of the moduli space of curves!
There are many other consequences; see [ELSV],
[GN] for surveys. For example, (i) Goulden and
Jackson's full polynomiality conjecture can be
proved; (ii) conjectured recursions for Hurwitz
numbers can be proved and new ones found; (iii)
after a nontrivial change of variables, the generating function H becomes (a mild generalization of)
Witten's free energy of a point; and (iv) this combinatorial description of intersections of l/J -classes
leads to Okounkov and Pandharipande's proof of
Witten's conjecture via asymptotic combinatorics.
We remark in passing that the ELSV formula is
an equality not just of numbers but in Chow (in
R o(.7\1 g,n) := R3 g-3+n(.7Vl g,n)). Interpreted properly,
this yields:
Theorem [CrV1J. R o(.7Vl g,n) ~ Q.

In other words, any two tautological a-cycles
on .7Vlg,n are commensurate. This is trivial in cohomology, but far from obvious in the Chow ring
(where A o, as described earlier, can be huge). Also,
Witten's conjecture can in some sense be interpreted as a recursion not just of numbers but in
Chow.
The ELSV formula can be proved using GromovWitten theory; this interpretation leads to
connections with the second, related, source of
combinatorial structure in the tautological ring,
the boundary strata.
The Tautological Ring in Arbitrary Genus:
Cycles of Arbitrary Dimension
In some sense we have a handle on a-cycles. By Faber's
algorithm, we also know how to intersect any two
tautological cycles. In cohomology this would be
enough for us to determine the full structure of the
ring, thanks to Poincare duality. It has been conjectured that "Poincare duality" also holds for Jvlg,n:
656

Poincare Duality Conjecture (or Speculation) for
Stable Curves (Hain-Looijenga). R *(.7Vl g,n) satisfies
Poincare duality.

In other words, if d = dimJvlg,n = 3g - 3 + n:
(I) R i (.7Vl g ,n) = a for i > d, which is obvious for
dimensional reasons;
(II) R d(.7Vl g ,n) ~ Q;
(III) the natural pairing Ri(Mg,n) x Rd-i(Mg,n) --+
R d (.7Vl g ,n) ~ Q is perfect.
For convenience we will call such a ring a dimension d Poincare duality ring and (I) and (II) the socle
conditions. (This terminology is from the theory of
Gorenstein rings.)
There is no a priori reason to expect the tautologicalring to satisfy Poincare duality. (For example, the
Chow ring certainly does not, as the hugeness of
AO(.7Vl I ,II) shows.) At this point, there is a great deal
of low-genus evidence for this conjecture; however,
the only genus-free evidence to date is (II), described
earlier.
This conjecture was motivated by an earlier
conjecture by Faber.
Faber's Conjecture (for Smooth Curves) [F1,
Con}.lJ.

(a) R * (.7Vl g ) is a dimension 9 - 2 Poincare duality
ring.
(b) The [g/3] classes KI, , K[g/3] generate the ring,
with no relations in degrees::; [g/3].
(c) There exist explicit formulas for the proportionalities in degree 9 - 2, which may be given as follows:
1
IIId1 +1'lld2+
Ill dk +1
'Y2
. . . 'Yk

'YI

(2g - 3 + k)!(2g - I)!!
k

(2g - I)! Ilj=l (2d j + I)!!

_
K g -2 -

~

L

Ku ·

UESk

Here (2a - 1)" is shorthand for 1 . 3 ... (2a - 1);
K u = KIlXIIKIlX21 ... KllXV(a-) I for a decomposition (J" =
lXIlX2 . . . lXv(u) of the permutation (J" into disjoint
cycles; and IlX I is the sum of the elements in the
cycle lX, where Sk acts on the k-tuples with entries
d l , , d k • (Faber conjectured furthermore that
R*(.7Vl g ) "behaves like" the algebraic cohomology
ring of a smooth projective manifold of dimension 9 - 2; the additional properties required
will not be discussed here.) Faber verified the
conjecture for genus up to 15-a highly nontrivial
calculation on difficult-to-handle spaces. Part (c) in
particular highlights the combinatorial structure
of the tautological ring. Significant progress has
been made on this conjecture, in the form of three
theorems.

NOTICES Of! THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

Theorem.
(a) (Looijenga) Ri(Jvl g ) = 0 for i > g - 2, and
Rg- 2(Jvl g ) = Q. (The latter statement uses a
calculation of Faber [Fl, Thm. 2J.)
(b) (Morita, Ionel) Part (b) of Faber's conjecture
is true in cohomology. (lonel's proof should
extend to the Chow ring without difficulty.)
(c) (Getzler, Pandharipande, Givental) Part (c) of
Faber's conjecture is true.

(A word of explanation of (c): Getzler and Pandharipande showed that the Virasoro conjecture for
[p>2 implies this part of Faber's conjecture. As
described earlier, Givental has since proved the
Virasoro conjecture for all projective spaces. This
proof for (c) is quite round-about and complicated;
it would be good to have a better proof, and this
seems within reach.)
Hence all that remains is the "perfect pairing"
part of the conjecture; while there is some prospect
for proving cases of this open problem (for example, the case i = 1 and possibly 2), there are no current hopes for approaching the general problem.
Faber and Pandharipande have proposed two
other generalizations of Faber's conjecture: to
curves with "rational tails" (curves whose dual
graph contains a vertex of genus g) and to curves
of "compact type" (curves whose dual graph has
no loops). For example, the curve of Figure 1 is of
both types, but the curve of Figure 2 is neither.
Boundary Strata and Vanishing of Tautological
Classes
These conjectures are closely related to the combinatorial structure of the tautological ring involving
boundary strata by way of the following result.
Tautological Vanishing Theorem [GrV2J. Any tautological class of codimension i is trivial away from
strata satisfying
# genus 0 vertices

~ i -

g + 1.

For example, the "vanishing" part of Looijenga's
theorem (a) above (that Ri(M g ) = 0 for i > g - 2)
is a consequence as follows. If i ~ g, then any
codimension i class vanishes on the open set
corresponding to curves with no genus 0 vertices
and in particular on Mg. If i = g - 1, then the
theorem does not directly apply. However, from
the definition of the tautological ring, we see that
any tautological class on M g is pushed forward
from :Jvl g ,l; hence a codimension g - 1 class on M g
is pushed forward from a codimension g class on
Jvlg,l, which vanishes by the same argument. The
reader may like to extend this argument to address
the case of "curves with rational tails" described
above (part of the "rational tail" conjecture of Faber
and Pandharipande).
As another example, the reader may enjoy proving the "vanishing" part of the analog of part (a) of

JUNE/JULY 2003

Faber's conjecture for the moduli space of "compact type" curves M~,n c Mg,n by showing the following sequence of facts. If i > 2g - 3 + n, there is
no compact type (Le., no-loop) stable dual graph of
genus g with n points. If i = 2g - 3 + n, then there
are: they are strata containing only trivalent genus
o vertices, g genus 1 "leaves", and n "half-edges".
These strata are of codimension precisely
2g - 3 + n, so R2g-3+n(M~,n) is generated by these
strata. Any two of these strata are related by crossratio relations. It is a straightforward geometric fact
that anyone of these strata is nontrivial in cohomology (and hence the Chow ring), so we have
shown that Ri(M~,n) vanishes for i > 2g - 3 + n
and is one-dimensional for i = 2g - 3 + n.
The analogous theorem for stable curves, the fact
Ro(Mg,n) ~ Q described earlier, follows similarly;
there are many extensions along these lines.
We conclude with another remarkable consequence, which indeed partially motivated the vanishing theorem. As described earlier, in genus 1, </Ji
is rationally equivalent to a sum of boundary strata.
In genus 2 Mumford and Getzler proved that on
Jvl 2,n, </Ji </J j is also supported on the boundary (Le.,
is trivial on M 2 ,n). Based on this, Getzler conjectured
the following statement, which was proved by lonel.
(lonel states the result in cohomology, but her proof
should carry through in the Chow ring.)
lonel's Theorem (formerly Getzler's Conjecture).
If g > 0, all degree g monomials in </Jl' ... , </In vanish on Mg,n.

The reader may use the tautological vanishing
theorem to obtain a second proof.

Conclusion
Since Kontsevich's proof of Witten's conjecture,
there has been a great deal of progress in understanding the geometry and topology of the moduli
space of curves and in particular its tautological
ring. The objects in question are quite classical,
and the fundamental perspective behind the proofs
of the results described above, that of understanding
curves as covers of the projective line, is very much
so. However, the recent progress is highly motivated
by work in other fields (such as string theory,
combinatorics, representation theory, topology,
symplectic geometry, integrable systems, and more),
and some of the techniques are quite modern (such
as those of Gromov-Witten theory). As new ideas
continue to flow into algebraic geometry from
.these neighboring fields, there should be even more
exciting developments in the near future.
References
[ACGH] E. ARBAREllO, M. CORNALBA, P. GRIFFITHS, and]. HARRIs,
Geometry of Algebraic Curves I, Grundlehren Math.
Wiss., vol. 267, Springer, Berlin, 1985.

NOTICES OF THE AMS

657

Praise for

The Honors Class
The Honors Class:
Hilbert's Problems and Their Solvers

[DM] P. DELIGNE and D. MUMFORD, The irreducibility of the
space of curves of given genus, Publ. Math. IHES 36
(1969),75-109.
[ELSV] T. EKEDAHL, S. lANDO, M. SHAPIRO, and A. VAINSHTEIN,
Hurwitz numbers and intersections on moduli spaces
of curves, Invent. Math. 146 (2001),297-327.
[Fl] C. FABER, A conjectural d~scription of the tautological ring of the moduli space of curves, Moduli ofCurves
and Abelian Varieties, Aspects. Math., E33, Vieweg,
Braunschweig, 1999, pp. 109-129.
[F2] _ _, Maple program for computing Hodge integrals,
personal communication. Available at http://math .
stanford.edu/~vakil/programs/.

The

H:OrlOrS (Jass

Ben Yandell
2002; ISBN 1-56881-141-1
Hardcover; 496 pp.; $39.00

'Yandell' weaves an absorbing aJ:ld.:s~ngag.ing' stOrY aPolft. ,
matJ:ematics and m~tJ:~J:Ila~ci~Ofthe twentiethcen-

t(ny.He demoru;~' " ·'i:;~JiCs is'not old;tITe<t
,andduSty; ra~~~~~< . . > '. .... . ... ...••. ....• .......<~:~ e ex~mentofthe'
purswt ofthe'~l~bio:h:capPoo by tlle':tmill ofachieving it.~~
> ...

,~Mathematic~'Teacher, Vol.

'"'~:,~f;Jer 200~'

~t~;$~if~l~~i~:s~ii

sightful. Along the ~~y,~F.~~"r~~~~~gets someoflt~~:;?r}'.',:

;::~Z~:~~~~P~~i~I;!li

[FL] C. FABER and E. LOOIjENGA, Remarks on moduli of
curves, Moduli ofCurves al1dAbelian Varieties, Aspects"
Math., E33, Vieweg, Braunschweig, 1999, pp. 23-45.
[Fu] W. FULTON, Young Tableaux with Applications to
Representation Theory and Geometry, Cambridge Dniv"
Press, New York, 1997.
[GN] I. P. GoULDEN, D. M. JACKSON, and R. VAKIL, The GromovWitten potential of a point, Hurwitz numbers, and
Hodge integrals, Proc. London Math. Soc. (3) 83 (2001),
563-581.
[GrVl] T. GRABER and R. VAKIL, On the tautological ring of
:M.g,n, Proceedings of the Seventh Gokova GeometryTopology Conference, International Press, 2000.
[GrV2] _ _ , Relative virtual localization, and vanishing
of tautological classes on moduli spaces of curves,
manuscript in preparation.
[HL] R. HAIN and E. LOOIjENGA, Mapping class groups
and moduli spaces of curves, Proc. Sympos. Pure
Math., vol. 62, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1997,
pp.97-142.
[HM] J. HARRIs and I. MORRISON, Moduli ofCurves, Grad. Texts
Math., vol. 187, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1998.
[L] E. LOOIjENGA, Intersection theory on Deligne-Mumford
compactifications (after Witten and Kontsevich), Seminaire Bourbaki, Vol. 1992/93, AsterisqueNo. 216 (1993),
Exp. No. 768,4,187-212.
[M] D. MUMFORD, Toward an enumerative geometry of
the moduli space of curves, Arithmetic and Geometry, Vol. II (M. Artin and J. Tate, eds.), Progr. Math.,
vol. 36, Birkhauser Boston, Boston, MA, 1983, pp.
271-328.
[MirSym] K. HORI, S. KATZ, A. KLEMM, R. PANDHARIPANDE,
R. THOMAS, C. VAFA, R. VAKIL, and E. ZASLOW, GromovWitten Theory and Mirror Symmetry, Clay Math. Inst.,
Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2003, to appear.
[P] R. PANDHARIPANDE, Three questions in Gromov-Witten
theory, Proceedings ofthe 2002ICM, Vol. IT, pp. 503-512.
[V] R. VAKIL, Characteristic numbers of quartic plane
curves, Canad.]. Math. 51 (1999), 1089-1120.

A K Peters, Ltd.
63 South Ave., Natick, MA01760-4626
Tel: (508) 655-9933 Fax: (508) 655-5847
www.akpeters.com·service@akpeters.com

658

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

I am a MATHEMATICIAN
and it is essential for me to be able to
search across both breadth and depth of
content. ScienceDirect now has back
issues from volume 1, issue 1, coupled
with the advanced search functionality.
I get to the information I need
quickly and easily.
That's why I use ScienceDirect

Over 50 leading journals including:
~ Topology

• Advances in Applied Mathematics
• Mathematical and Computer Modelling
• Nonlinear Analysis
Over 115,000 peer-reviewed, full-text articles.
Links take you seamlessly from the bibliographic
references to the abstract or full-text version of the
cited article.
Customizable alerting services let you pinpoint the
information you- need to keep up~to-date.

SCIENCE

Arnold Ross
(1906-2002)

Arnold Ross died
on September 25,
2002, at the age of
ninety-six. His unwavering commitment to nurturing
mathematical talent
had a profound impact on many
young people. Softspoken and hnfailingly politeJ Ross
possessed an uncompromising will
that allowed him to
translate intp educational practice his
own exalted ideals
about knowledge,
Arnold Ross creativity, and communication.
Arnold Ephraim Ross was born in Chicago on August 24, 1906, and spent his childhood in Odessa,
Russia. After returning to Chicago in 1922, he
changed his original surname, Chaimovich, to Ross.
He became a student at the University of Chicago,
where he was deeply influenced by E. H. Moore and
by L. E. Dickson, who advised Ross on his Ph.D. in
number theory, completed in 1931. After holding
a fellowship at the California Institute of Technology and teaching at the People's Junior College,
Ross spent eleven years at St. Louis University.
During World War II he worked for the U.S. Navy
as a research mathematician. In 1946 he was appointed as the head of the mathematics department
at the University of Notre Dame. Ross left Notre
Dame in 1963 to become the chairman of the department of mathematics at the Ohio State University (OSU), retiring in 1976.
Perhaps his most notable lifetime achievement
was the summer program he started at Notre Dame
660

for high-school students talented in mathematics.
Even before the Sputnik era, Ross divined the need
for encouraging such students. In the summer program, he developed innovative methods to impart
creativity and problem-solving skills in a manner
that would benefit the students throughout their
lives. The Ross Program. moved to Ohio State ill
1964 and continues to thrive there. Ross directed
and taught in that program every summer until
poor health forced him to retire in 2000 at age
ninety-four. In the 1970s he carried this program
to Australia, India, and West Germany, where local
efforts flourished for several years. Alumni of the
highly successful Ross Program at Ohio State have
created similar programs at other universities in
the United States and Canada.
In the 1960s Ross also initiated innovative outreach programs for inner-city school children in
Columbus and served on several national committees concerned with mathematics education.
He received many academic honors, including national awards for teaching and service in mathematics: the OSU Distinguished Teaching Award
(1974) and Distinguished Service Award (1981),
the Mathematics Association of America Award
for Distinguished Service (1986), and the AMS Citation for Public Service (1998). In 1993 the AMS
established the annual "Arnold Ross Lecture Series",
in which top mathematicians present lectures to
high-school students. Ross also received an honorary doctoral degree from Denison University
(1984).
Arnold Ross married Bertha (Bee) Horecker in
1931, and they had a long and happy marriage
until her death in 1983. They had no children. In
1990 he married Madeleine Green, who remained
with him in a close, loving relationship for the rest
of his life.
What follows are reminiscences about Arnold
Ross from students and colleagues who worked
with him during his long career. Further information

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

about Ross may be found in "Interview with Arnold
Ross", Notices, August 2001, pages 691-8.
-Allyn Jackson and Daniel Shapiro

Prakash Bambah
While talking of Arnold Ross, I often recall the
following: A young student passing through Columbus came to the mathematics department at the
time Arnold had gone to lunch with some others.
Seeing the student's disappointment, the secretary suggested that he see Arnold at the faculty dining hall. The student said, "How will I find him? I
have never met him." The secretary replied, "You
ask for the mathematicians' table, and as you near
it one man will get up to get a chair for you; that
will be Professor Ross." Arnold was considerate to
everyone, and he was passionately committed to
bringing out the best in the young, especially the
gifted or the deprived. It was a privilege to be one
of his friends.

many mathematicians who would pass through
Notre Dame at his invitation.
I also remember how proud I felt when he asked
me to stay on after graduation and be one of his
teaching assistants in his National Science Foundation summer program for secondary-school
teachers. I developed much of my own teaching
style by observing him and the other instructors
he would choose for that program, and I was happy
to return for a second summer after my first year
as a graduate student at Berkeley. I especially appreciated his commitment to the inspiration of
secondary-school students, who returned as assistants during their college years, in his successful summer programs at Notre Dame and later at
Ohio State. I was very happy to read about 'the
many awards that acknowledged his lifelong contributions to our profeSSion, including the Gung Hu
Award from the Mathematical Association of America for meritorious service.
Over the years, whenever we would meet, I loved
talking to him and sharing teaching experiences.
He kept to the end his passion for teaching and for
the encouragement of teachers and students at all
levels. That passion will continue to make an impact as we remember Arnold Ross.

Thomas Banchoff
At the final banquet of the joint AMS-MAA meeti~gs each January over the past twenty years, I al-

ways made sure to find a seat next to Arnold Ross.
It was a great way to see so many fellow mathematicians, as they would come up to him to express
their appreciation for his encouragement throughout their careers. It is hard to believe that he will
be there only in spirit from now on.
Although I was not one of those fortunate
enough to participate in his "Saturday school" sessions for high-school students, I did meet him on
my visit to Notre Dame in the spring of my senior
year. His warm reception and his genuine interest
in my geometric science-fair project sealed my determination to come there and major in
mathematics. I recall him challenging us with problems in his number-theory seminar and urging us
undergraduates to attend presentations by the
Allyn]ackson is senior writer and deputy editor ofthe Notices. Her email address is axj @ams .0 rg.
Daniel Shapiro is professor of mathematics at the Ohio
State University and director of the Ross Mathematics
Program. His email address' is shapi ro@math.
ohi o-state. edu.

After many years at the Ohio State University, Prakash
Bambah became a professor at Panjab University, Chandigarh, India, where he also served as vice chancellor. He
is now professor emeritus at Panjab University. His email
address is bambah rp@redi ffma i 1 . com.
Thomas Banchoff is professor of mathematics at Brown
University. His email address is tfb@cs. brown. edu.

JUNE/JULY 2003

Ross lecturing, 1996.

Felix Browder
For the last half of the twentieth century, Arnold
Ross was the outstanding figure in the United
States in the encouragement of mathematical talent among young people on the precollegiate level.
The only comparable figure on a world level was
I. M. Gelfand and his Mathematical Correspondence
School in Moscow. Although Arnold spent most of
his childhood and early youth in Odessa in the
Ukraine, the most important influence on his ideas
and activities came from his mentors at the University of Chicago, especially E. H. Moore and
Felix Browder is professor of mathematics at Rutgers University and past president of the AMS. His email address
is browder@math. rutgers. edu.

NOTICES OF THE AMS

661

Leonard Eugene Dickson. (Interestingly, Gelfand also spent
his early years in the Ukraine,
but in a rural village.)
The Ross Program, which
has run for almost fifty years,
is a summer program for highschool students whose participants are selected on the basis
of their ability to independently solve nontrivial elementary problems. It is based
on three central principles: selfmotivated activity by the student participants; a basic
course always taught by Arnold
Ross in elementary number
theory, culminating, hopefully,
Madeleine and Arnold Ross, in the students finding their
1996. own proofs for the GaussLegendre Quadratic Reciprocity Law; and a strong emphasis on cooperation between students and the counselors who are former
students. These principles, combined with Arnold's
single-minded devotion to the students and counselors, gave rise to a remarkable esprit de corps.
In the mid 1970s, after Arnold had run his program for at least a decade at Ohio State University,
where he was long-term chairman of the mathematics department, a crisis developed. Arnold retired as chairman, the Ohio State administration
was unsympathetic, and the NSF [National Science
Foundation] cancelled its program of support for
talented students (justified by the curious doctrine that support for the talented constitutes an
"elitist" attack on "democracy", which must have
had Thomas Jefferson rotating in his grave with incredible angular velocity).
As chairman of the mathematics department at
the University of Chicago, I suggested to Arnold that
we should adopt the program with support from
the university and from outside donors. This was
done successfully for four summers, with Arnold
teaching his basic course and senior faculty members like I. N. Herstein, R. Narasimhan, and Paul Sally
teaching collateral courses. Arnold returned the
program to Ohio State in 1979.

David Pollack
I first met Arnold Ross as a student and then was
a counselor in his summer program during the
summers of 1988-93. In addition to being a teacher,
mentor, and friend, Ross was something of a cult
David Pollack is assistant professor of mathematics at
Wesleyan University. His email address is dpo11 ack@
wes 1eyan . edu.

662

hero to the counselors at the program. We were fascinated by his many stories, his careful Russianinfluenced speech, his unique classroom style, and
even by his consistency in wearing a plain white
dress shirt to lecture every day.
It was inevitable then that rumors began to fly
during the summer of 1990 when Ross started
wearing pinstriped shirts to class. The situation
came to a head when one morning he was observed
to be wearing a new ring. Shortly after lecture,
when the counselors had gathered to escort him
on his daily walk back to his office, Ross strode up
to us with a striking woman at his side and introduced his new bride by declaring, "Gang, I'd like
you meet Mrs. Ross."
Naturally we were all delighted. But we could not
have known at the time what a wonderful woman
Madeleine Ross would prove to be or how extraordinary an influence she would have on Arnold and
on the program. Far beyond the introduction of
color into his wardrobe, Madeleine's love reinvigorated Ross. She gave us all the gift of having him
run the program for ten more years, until the age
of nearly ninety-four.
I had the privilege and joy of growing closer to
Arnold and Madeleine while I was a member of the
faculty at OSU from 1998 to 2001. I am greatly
warmed by the strength of their love and by the
open and pure way in which their affection for
each other shone through their every interaction.
I count this look at a deep and true love high among
the many life-changing lessons I learned from
Arnold Ross.

Peter Roquette
Reflecting on the past" I now realize how much
lowe to Arnold Ross and what I learned from him,
not about mathematics, but about how to teach;
about setting and keeping standards, not only for
others, but also for oneself. I believe it was in the
1960s when I first met him at Notre Dame, and at
once I realized his extraordinary gift for motivating people gently and with understanding. During
the years when we had contact I had many occasions to observe his concern for the problems of
others and in particular of those whom he called
"youngsters." He really cared. I find myself lucky
to have met in my life such an extraordinary personality.
I never had the opportunity to participate in
one of his summer schools, but in discussions with
him I learned about the value of such enterprises.
Two times he was in Germany and helped us with
all his experience and wisdom to establish our
Peter Roquette is professor emeritus at the Universitiit
Heidelberg. His email addressisroquette@uni-hd.de.

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

Schulerseminar, modeled in large part on his summer program. Without his help and his devotion to
this task we would never have been able to do this
here so successfully. Later in the 1990s, when I
wrote to him about my plans to establish a common seminar with young German and Russian students, he generously donated some funds that
helped us realize these plans.
Both my wife, Erika, and I remember well Bee
Ross, who, at the side of her husband, gave him a
loving and understanding hand in his devoted
work. We are sure that Arnold and Bee will be remembered by the many mathematicians and
"youngsters" who had, like us, the privilege to meet
the Rosses.

Ross lecturing, 1996.

But most of all what I will remember about
Arnold Ross is his passion for inspiring and encouraging gifted students. He was willing to channel all his considerable energy in this direction, and
he never stopped encouraging others to do the
same.

Paul J. Sally Jr.
At the urging of Felix Browder, Arnold Ross
transported his Summer Science Training Program
to the University of Chicago in summer 1975. It has
never been clear to me whether his intent was to
move the program to Chicago permanently or to
establish a branch to run along with the Ohio State
program. At this time I had known Arnold for
years, and many alumni of his program had come
to Chicago as undergraduates. However, during
the summers of 1975, 1976, and 1977, I really
came to understand Arnold and the nature of his
devotion to young people. I also learned the workings of his program. Arnold returned to Ohio State
in 1979 and ran his program for many more years.
All of the Chicago outreach programs for young
mathematicians since 1978 have reflected the principles and structure of Arnold's program. My admiration for Arnold's achievements and commitment is unbounded.

Karl Rubin
I knew Arnold Ross for about one-third of his
life and about two-thirds of mine. Like many others, I first met him when I was a high-school student in his summer program at Ohio State. I continued as a counselor in the Ross Program at Ohio
State and at the University of Chicago when Arnold
moved the program there temporarily. I also went
with Arnold twice to Heidelberg to help out as an
experienced counselor in the program he was try- :
ing to establish in Germany, and later we were colleagues for many years in the Ohio State mathematics department.
Needless to say, this contact had a tremendous
influence on me and on my career. First of all (and
most important in the early years), it was fun. I was
discovering mathematics in the company of others
who enjoyed it as I did. The sense of discovery and
the people I met were very important in my mathematical development. Second, observing an inspiring teacher at close range and over many years
has influenced my own teaching in many ways,
from the idea of learning by discovery to the "accidental" arithmetic errors in lectures.
Karl Rubin is professor of mathematics at Stanford University. His email address is rubi n@math. stanford. edu.
JUNE/JULY 2003

James Schultz
I never had a course with Arnold, but I consider
him to be among the most influential people in my
life. As his administrative assistant in the Ohio
State University mathematics department for three
years, including the campus riots of the early 1970s,
I can recount many events.
On one occasion I was persuaded by another student that we needed to convince Ross to leave the
University Oval, where he stood with others between armed soldiers and angry student demonstrators, because he was "too old" to be out there.
(Note that this was over thirty years ago!) Instead,
Arnold convinced us to spend the rest of the day
there with him. That night I went home and learned
the terrible news of the shootings at Kent State, not
far from where we had stood, and realized the
importance of what Arnold had done. Incidentally,
one reason for the other student's concern for
Paul]. Sally Jr. is professor ofmathematics at the University
ofChicago, where he directs the Young Scholars Program.
His email address is sa11 y@math . uchi cago . edu.
James Schultz is the Robert L. Morton Professor of Mathematics Education at Ohio University. His email address
is schul tz@ohi o. edu.

NOTICES OF THE AMS

663

Ross was that Arnold had secured a place for this
student's house trailer on OSU property when no
trailer park in Columbus would have the student
and his family because they were black.
Another incident occurred. when a belligerent
student came to the office and demanded to see
the chair of the department. We wanted to "protect"
Ross, but Arnold welcomed him. Arnold told the
student he was pleased to see his commitment to
important issues. The student who came in shouting profanity left in tears fifteen minutes later,
promising his help.

Ross lecturing, 1996.

Alice Silverberg
Arnold Ross was both a genius and a pragmatic
idealist. He believed that talent can be found anywhere; nurturing that talent was his life's work
and his passion.
What Arnold Ross created in his summer program was, first and foremost, a community. The students, counselors, seminar leaders, lecturers, and
director form a supportive community of people
who want to learn and grow, are willing to work
hard, and love doing mathematics. The students
achieve at a high level because the standards that
are set for them are very high. Arnold Ross knew
that he was nurturing future leaders, not just in
mathematics and in academia, but in numerous
other areas.
As is the case for many people who have been
in the Ross Program, it has been one of the most
intense and rewarding experiences of my life, not
only as a student and counselor, but also as a
teacher in the program. The program has been a
major influence on my teaching style and philosophy and also on my sense of what it means to be
a mathematician. I feel privileged to be part of the
Ross community.
Alice Silverberg is professor of mathematics at the Ohio
State University. Her email address is si 1ver@math.
ohi o-state. edu.

664

Glenn Stevens
Over almost half a century Arnold Ross has influenced countless young people to embrace the
life of scientific exploration. It was a great privilege
for me to participate in his summer program as a
young high-school student back in the late 1960s
and early 1970s. Even more important has been the
enduring friendship with Arnold that grew out of
those early contacts.
All who knew Arnold found inspiration in his inexhaustible energy as well as comfort in the warmth
of his personality. His personal charm seemed only
to be enhanced by his sometimes mischievous
views on education. For example, when asked by
well-intentioned colleagues how he dealt with the
intense competitive spirit that so many youngsters
bring to his program, Arnold always replied without hesitation and with characteristic charm: "We
encourage it!" At a national meeting of educators
working to encourage minority students to major
in mathematics and science, I recall Arnold's cheerful acknowledgment "Yes, this is very important... "
as well as his challenge "But what will we do for
the elite?" Arnold's commitment to developing talent at the highest levels and across the social spectrum was principled and consistently put forward
at every public forum he attended.
Arnold's influence inspired the two most important decisions of my professional life-to become a research mathematician and to work with
my colleagues to develop the PROMYS program, a
program for high-school students modeled closely
on the Ross Program. As a research mathematician
I am fortunate to live and work within a community of individuals actively engaged in exploration
and discovery. And through the PROMYS program
I have the rich pleasure of working with so many
bright and energetic young people and their teachers. I am enormously grateful to Arnold for having introduced me to both of these possibilities
early in my life.

Bert K. Waits
While a graduate student at Ohio State University, I served as "assistant to the chairman" to
Arnold during the period 1964-69, doing course
scheduling and other logistics relating to running
a large mathematics department. One of my fondest memories is the great "trailer" incident. One fall
Glenn Stevens is professor of mathematics at Boston University. His email address is ghs@math . bu . edu.
Bert K. Waits is professor emeritus of mathematics at the
Ohio State University. His email address is wai tsb@
math.ohio-state.edu.

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

we were blessed with an influx of graduate students
and lacked office space for them. Arnold asked me
to get more space assigned to us by the administration. After I hit a brick wall trying to get the extra
office space, he worked very hard personally, making calls and sending letters for several weeks with
no luck. So he made a serious threat to the dean
and provost that he would give up his office suite
for the graduate students, rent a house trailer,
park it out behind the mathematics building, move
his offices to the trailer, and finally call the local
papers. I know this to be a fact, as I helped to write
the letter and made several calls about securing a
rental trailer. He hand-delivered the letter to the
dean, and a few days later some nearby space was
magically reassigned to us.
This is just a glimpse showing Arnold's deep love
of students and their welfare. I also fondly remember observing his summer number-theory
course with "his kids" and being in awe of his
teaching style and rapport with "his kids." His passion for teaching, his courage, and his love of mathematics shaped my life in many ways.

Max Warshauer
I attended the Ross Summer Program during
three summers, 1967-69. This experience excited
my interest in and love of mathematics and a desire to develop a similar atmosphere for my own
students. The remarkable thing was the wonderful,
intense journey and immersion in doing mathematics that the program created, as we all struggled to "think deeply of simple things." My counselor, Dan Shapiro, now directs the Ross Program.
Dan embodies the spirit and philosophy that Arnold
wanted to create and sustain.
The Ross Program is a national treasure that sets
a standard for what students can accomplish in
mathematics. At Southwest Texas State University
(SWT) I have worked with colleagues for the past
fourteen years developing a program that I hope
similarly engages young students in mathematics,
including summer mathematics camps for students in grades 3-8 and a 6-week residential program for high-school students. It was exciting to
build our own program, and to work with Dan in
refining our problem sets that follow the Ross
model and tradition. The mathematical community
generously supports our program through grants
such as those through the AMS Epsilon Fund. We
have begun summer mathematics camps in over
twenty districts in Texas and formed a center, SWT
Max Warshauer is professor of mathematics at Southwest
Texas State University. His email address ismax@swt. edu.

JUNE/JULY 2003

Mathworks, to coordinate our
programs for students and
teachers.
By challenging students to
discover new ideas, to make
conjectures, and to give careful arguments and explanations, we try to bring to all
students the joy of doing
mathematics that Arnold fostered in his students over the
past fifty years.

Gloria Woods

Ross with his first wife, Bee, in

As the wife of Alan Woods, the 19705.
a number theorist at Ohio
State, I got to know Arnold and Bee Ross very well
during the 1960s. Starting in 1979, I was privileged to work with Ross in his Summer Mathematics Program for the next twenty-three years.
Arnold Ross was the Pied Piper of mathematics: in
talking to him about anything, you somehow ended
by agreeing to do something "extraordinarily important" for mathematics. When the Ross Summer
Program returned to OSU in 1979 after three years
at the University of Chicago, Arnold convinced me
to help out. We didn't have a formal agreement
about my duties. I would visit the lectures and
seminars, I would stop by the dormitory and observe the kids at work, I would be available to help
the counselors manage the inevitable crises that
arose. In those early years the program had very
little funding. No one was paid except the counselors, who lived and studied with the program participants in the dormitory (and who earned every
penny of their paychecks). Most positions in the
program were very fuzzy and voluntary, and none
of us knew exactly what our job was really about,
except that we needed to keep the program alive!
My job title could change quickly depending on
circumstances. One day I would be introduced to
a mother or father of a student as dorm mother,
or as student advisor. The next day I would be the
Ross Program assistant director or administrative
assistant or T-shirt sales rep, depending on what
job had to be done. When I was introduced to an
NSF representative, I became the co-director so I
could have the privilege of being a co-PIon a grant
proposal and be allowed to represent the Ross Program at the NSF meetings in Washington, DC. Ross
would say, "You see, Gloria, a title is not important,
but it is very important to know what to do with a
title when you do use it."
Gloria Woods is a lecturer in the Department of Mathematics at the Ohio State University. Her email address is
GWoods2107@aol.com.

NOTICES OF THE AMS

665

s

a Bubble Tree?
Thomas H. Parker

Some of the most important equations of physics
and geometry are conformally invariant. One example is Laplace's equation

(1)

~U=O

for functions U on a domain in ]R2 , which arises as
the variational equation of the energy
(2)

E(u) =

f Idul

2

dvol.

Conformal invariance can be seen by explicitly writing the integrand, as geometers do, in terms of the
Riemannian metric f/.ij (and its inverse gij). Thus we
write IduI 2 as Lij g'JOiUOjU and write the volume
form as ~det gij dx dy. One then sees that, for any
positive function cp, the conformal change of metric gij .- cp gij leaves E(u) invariant, and therefore
solutions of the variational equation (1) remain
solutions. That is the meaning of the phrase
"conformally invariant".
The holomorphic map equation-which is a
nonlinear generalization of the Cauchy-Riemann
equation that applies to maps from a Riemann
surface to a complex manifold X -also is conformally invariant. When X has a Kahler metric,
solutions minimize the energy integral (2).
Other nonlinear conformally invariant equations, such as the equations for Yang-Mills fields,
harmonic maps, and constant-mean-curvature hypersurfaces in]R3 , also have an associated energy.
For each, standard methods of partial differential
equations imply that there is an EO > 0 such that:
(A) (Energy Gap) Any positive-energy solution U on
the n-sphere Sn has E(u) ~ EO.
(B) (Uniform Convergence) Any bounded sequence
{Uk} of solutions defined on a ball with
E(Uk) < EO for all n has a subsequence converging in the COO topology on compact subsets.
Thomas H. Parker is professor of mathematics at Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI. His email address
is parker@math.msu. edu.

666

(C) (Removable Singularities) Any smooth finiteenergy solution on a punctured ball B \ {O}
extends to a smooth solution on B.
Solutions of conformally invariant equations
on]Rn pull back to solutions under any conformal
transformations, including translations, rescalings
x .- AX, and stereographic projection a : sn --+ ]Rn.
Thus, given a positive-energy solution on sn, we can
pull back by a-I, rescale, and then translate to get
a solution on ]Rn concentrated near any desired
point. Such a solution is called an instanton.
Superpositions of instantons concentrated at
different points are not solutions-these are non- linear equations!-but are nearly solutions. It is
a general theme, which began with C. Taubes's
work on Yang-Mills fields and now runs across the
study of all these conformally invariant equations,
that under certain conditions one can perturb such
superpositions to obtain "multi-instanton" solutions on]Rn (and also on manifolds, as illustrated
below).
Additional rescalings of ]Rn yield a sequence of
multi-instanton solutions that concentrate at the
origin and converge to a trivial solution pointwise
on]Rn \ {O}. That limit loses energy. A bubble tree
is a way of recovering the lost energy by keeping
track of the part of the solution that is squeezed
into the origin.
The Bubble Tree Construction
Given a sequence {Uk} of solutions of some conformally invariant equation, we would like to find
a convergent subsequence. For that we assume
that the images are uniformly bounded, that
E(Uk) < E for all k, and that the domain is a closed
manifold M. The key is to look at the energy densities e(uk) = I dUk 1 2 dvol and use the "bubbling"
idea of K. Uhlenbeck [3] as modified in [2].
Cover M with balls of radius p so that no point
is in more than, say, ten balls. Passing to a
subsequence, we can ensure that (B) applies on all
but at most 1OE / EO "bad" balls. Doing that for a

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

~--.-p

Forming a bubble
Energy density of a 2-instanton on a torus
sequence Pm - 0, we can pass to a diagonal
subsequence (still denoted Uk) for which the bad
balls converge to points Xl, ... , x-e. By facts (B) and
(C), these Uk converge in Coo to a limit Uo on
M \ {Xl, ... , x-e}, and the energy densities e(uk)
converge as measures to e(uo) plus a sum of point
measures at the Xi with mass mi ~ EO:
e(Uk) - e(uo) +

I mi 8

While this limit uo is a solution, it is not the full
story, because some energy (an amount mi > 0)
concentrates at each Xi and is not accounted for by
uo. We can recover the lost energy by renormalizing the Uk to "catch a bubble".
Fix a ball B(Xi, E) around one Xi. For each k
translate the center of mass of the measure e(uk)to
the origin, then dilate by the (smallest) factor Ak
which pushes mass (at least) EO /4 outside the unit
ball. It follows that Ak - 00. Pulling the Uk back by
stereographic projection from the south pole
P E Sn gives renormalized maps Uk defined on
larger and larger sets in Sn \ {P}. We can then let
E - 0 and pass to a subsequence to conclude that
Uk - uo on Sn \ {XiI, . . . ,Xim, P}. This uo is the
bubble map at Xi.
Convergence near the pole P must be carefully
studied. The issue is whether energy accumulates
in the "neck"-the annulus B(Xi, E) \ o-(B(P, E)) that
connects the original domain to the domain of the
bubble. That does not happen for holomorphic
maps, and consequently the bubble map has a removable singularity at P, and the images of the base
and the bubble meet at UO(Xi) = uo(P). A similar "No
Neck Energy" lemma holds for some-but not allother conformally invariant equations (see [1]).
We can now iterate the construction, renormalizing around each Xij and repeating, constructing
bubbles on bubbles (see [2]). The end result is a bubble tree domain consisting of the original domain
M with an attached tree of spheres S~ and a limit
map U oo with component maps Uo on M and UO,a
on each bubble S~. Facts (A)-(C) and a "No Neck
Energy" lemma imply two key properties:

uo either has

E(uo) ~ EO or has at least two higher bubbles

attached to its domain.
JUNE/JULY 2003

Because the total energy is bounded, stability
implies that the iteration process ends.
• Bubble Tree Convergence Theorem: After passing to a subsequence, e(uk) converges to e(u oo )

as measures, and {Uk} - U oo in Co, and in Coo
away from the double points of the bubble
domain. In particular, no energy is lost in the
limit.

Xi '

i

• Stability: Each bubble map

A bubble tree domain

Application to Gromov-Witten Invariants
The bubble tree construction generalizes to include (i) marked points Pi on the domain (by adding
point masses at the Pi to the measures e(uk)) and
(ii) varying conformal structures on the domain.
That leads to M. Kontsevich's notion of a stable
map: a holomorphic map u, from a genus-g nodal
complex curve C with -e marked points to a compact Kahler manifold X, is a stable map if 2g + -e ~ 3
and E(u) > 0 on each genus-O component with
fewer than three marked or double points. Let
Mg,-e(X, {3) be the space of all such stable maps
whose image represents the homology class
13 E H2(X), topologized by bubble tree convergence.
The above analysis then implies the fact, first
pointed out by M. Gromov, that the space
M g ,-e(X,f3) of stable maps is compact. After a
perturbation of the equations, evaluation at the
-e marked points gives a map
Mg,-e(X, {3) - X-e

whose image, thought of as a homology class, is
a Gromov-Witten invariant of X. In that sense,
Gromov-Witten invariants arise naturally from
the bubble tree construction.
References
[1] T. PARKER, Bubble tree convergence for harmonic maps,
]. Differential Geom. 44 (1996), 595-633.

[2] T. PARKER and J. WOLFSON, Pseudo-holomorphic maps
and bubble trees, ]. Geom. Anal. 3 (1993), 63-98.
[3]]. SACKS and K. UHLENBECK, The existence of minimal
immersions of 2-spheres, Ann. of Math. (2) 113
(1981), 1-24.

Comm"ents and suggestions for the "WHAT IS ... ?"
column maybe sent to noti ces-whati s@ams.org.

NOTICES OF THE AMS

667

Book Review

Emergence of the Theory ofLie
Groups: An Essay in the History of
Mathematics, 1869-1926
Reviewed by David E. Rowe

Emergence of the Theory of lie Groups:
An Essay in the History of Mathematics, 1869-1926

Thomas Hawkins
New York, Springer-Verlag, 2000
564 pages, $79.95
ISBN 0-387-98963-3

Among historians of mathematics Thomas
Hawkins has long been regarded as the leading
authority on the early history of Lie groups. After
decades of work on this fascinating theme, he has
synthesized the fruits of his labors in this 564-page
Essay in the History of Mathematics, a landmark
study that represents the culmination of his contributions to the field. In recognition of these accomplishments, the AMS recently named Hawkins its
first recipient of the prestigious Whiteman Prize
for exceptional scholarly writing on the history
of mathematics (see the citation and Hawkins's
response in Notices 48 (2001),416-7). Having
followed his work for many years, I would like to
take this opportunity to congratulate the recipient
and to commend the AMS committee that no.minated
him for this award; Hawkins richly deserves this high
distinction. The committee's citation also somewhat
relieves me from the strain of finding appropriate
superlatives to describe the present book, which
requires no further personal endorsement.
Hawkins's "essay" sets sharp temporal boundaries spanning the period from 1869, when Lie's
David E. Rowe is professor of the history of mathematics
and natural sciences at Mainz University. His email address
is rowe@rnathernat; k. un; -rna; nz. de.

668

NOTICES OF THE AMS

earliest work appeared,
up to Weyl's classic papers from 1925 to 1926,
along with a clearly
stated goal. In the preface he calls his book
"both more and less
than a [comprehensive]
history of the theory of
Lie groups". Less, because it deals primarily
with the origins of the
theory and those parts
of it pertaining to the
structure of Lie groups
and Lie algebras. More,
because he has a broader agenda in mind that goes
beyond the challenge of weaving together the
threads of this complicated story.
Historians, at least traditionally, are supposed
to be good storytellers, but serious history usually
has a larger purpose in mind. Crudely put, historians try to understand the past by explaining why
certain things happened the way they did. Hawkins
set himself the challenge of trying to understand
what motivated the principal actors who contributed to what eventually became known as the
theory of Lie groups. He wants to tell us not just
what happened but why, by showing how the. relevant mathematical developments were influenced
by the specific contexts in which this work was undertaken. What makes his book such impressive
reading is that he never loses sight of this goal,
despite all the obstacles involved, including the
VOLUME ~O, NUMBER 6

technically demanding mathematical ideas he
recounts so faithfully.
Hawkins dives headlong into many facets of research activity in surrounding areas that had a direct
bearing on the rather sporadic work that eventually
yielded the structure theory of Lie groups and algebras. Those who take the plunge with him will learn
much about the mathematical worlds in which some
of his main actors moved. He teaches us about the
influence of Jacobi's ideas on Lie's nascent theory
of groups and the impact of Weierstrassian ideas on
Wilhelm Killing; we learn about the Parisian response
to Lie's theory, especially as revealed in Elie Cartan's
work, and the broader impact of the G6ttingen atmosphere and how this shaped Hermann Weyl's
approach to global theory of Lie groups. The book's
four-part structure based on the contributions of
Lie, Killing, Cartan, and Weyl helps lend conceptual
clarity to an undertaking of truly vast scope. Somehow, despite his penchant for technical and historical detail, the author manages to keep the main
storyline clearly visible, even as he finds himself
spinning ever finer webs of mathematical ideas and
intellectual contexts, cuhninating with a brilliant discussion of the motivations behind Hermann Weyl's
work on the representation theory of Lie groups.
This is a book that opens new vistas for historians of mathematics, and for this reviewer it offers
the opportunity to reflect not only on what Hawkins
has accomplished but also on what remains to be
done in the light of his achievement. In what
follows I will try to survey the terrain he covers,
with an eye to some important themes and questions that deserve further consideration. Before
doing so, however, a few prefatory words should
be said about this volume's prospective audience.
In the preface Hawkins writes that his book is intended for students of mathematics as well as
mathematicians, physicists, and historians of
mathematics. He further notes that from his own
experience "the understanding of a theory is deepened by familiarity both with the considerations
that motivated various developments and with the
less formal, more intuitive manner in which they
were initially conceived." By implication this means
that readers should have a reasonably good understanding of modern Lie theory; for those who
do not, Hawkins recommends a number of standard
texts on the subject. Clearly the mathematical
demands he places on his readership are very high,
and he does not flinch from presenting detailed
technical ideas throughout.
Still, if knowledge of modern Lie theory is helpful,
even essential, to understand parts of this study,
another prerequisite seems to me even more
crucial, namely, an openness to and appreciation
for the often primitive and usually unfamiliar
mathematical ideas of the past. Historians of
mathematics take such an attitude for granted, but
JUNE/JULY 2003

experience tells me that mathematicians are not
generally accustomed to thinking about antiquated
results and methods. This strangeness poses a
major challenge for Hawkins's readership beyond
the technical competence his book demands. Historians after all are expected to engage their subject
matter on its own terms, whereas mathematicians
strive to move forward on the basis of sharply
circumscribed, state-of-the-art knowledge. Those
familiar with both mind-sets know that they are at
least potentially antithetical, and as a historian of
mathematics I feel compelled to emphasize that we
should "mind the gap" that separates them. Thus,
while I agree with Hawkins that a study like the present one can surely lead to a deeper understanding
of contemporary mathematics, I doubt that even experts on modern Lie theory will find this a sufficient
motivation to read his book from cover to cover.
So prospective readers be forewarned: this is a
full-blooded historical study about the emergence
of the theory of Lie groups. It is chock full of twists
and turns, with plenty of mathematical dead-ends
and, above all, unfamiliar ideas. The fellow who first
got the ball rolling, Sophus Lie (1844-1899), was a
visionary figure and saw himself in just that light.
Writing to the poet Bj0rnstjerne Bj0rnson in 1893,
Lie likened himself to the Norwegian poets of the
day: "...without fantasy one would never become
a mathematician, and what gave me a place among
the mathematicians of our day, despite my lack of
knowledge and form, was the audacity of my thinking."! One can scarcely exaggerate the enormous
differences between Lie's original ideas and the
modern theory that bears his name. In fact, the
terminology of Lie groups and Lie algebras became
current only in the 1930s, more than thirty years
after Lie's death. Lie's original theory dealt with
transformation groups, which were closely akin to
group actions on manifolds. Lie regarded such
transformations, the elements of which form what
is now called a local Lie group, as generated by the
infinitesimal maps associated with the first derivatives. To pass from these infinitesimal generators to the local transformations required finding
the solutions to a system of differential equations,
and it was this idea that lay at the heart of Lie's
vision. From Jacobi's work Lie also recognized that
the elements of the "infinitesimal group" satisfied
the familiar bracket relations for a Lie algebra, but
it was Wilhelm Killing who first explored their
structure theory as part of a program aimed at
classifying space forms. As for the global theory
of Lie groups, not even an inkling of such a possibility existed before the 1920s. Thus, only in the
final chapters will readers begin to make contact
with some of the more familiar ideas of modern Lie
! Quoted on the dust jacket of Arild Stubhaug, The
Mathematician Sophus Lie, Springer-Verlag, 2002.

NOTICES OF THE AMS

669

theory. With these general remarks in mind, let
me now turn to take a closer look at Hawkins's
study.
Origins of Lie Theory and the Erlangen
Program
In the preface the author notes his indebtedness
to other historical studies, but he also emphasizes
the originality of his
analyses of eight particular topics to which he
attaches special significance: (1) the roots of
Lie's theory in geometrical and analytical problems, several taken up
together with Felix
Klein; (2) Killing's work
on foundations of geometry as an expression of
Weierstrassian research
ideals; (3) how the study
of space forms led to
Killing's work on the
structure of Lie algebras;
(4) Cartan's revamping
of Killing's faulty theory
of secondary roots; (5)
Sophus lie, circa 1870. how research ideals in
Paris affected the reception of Lie's theory, including Cartan's work on
Lie algebras; (6) an analysis of work undertaken in
Lie's school on representations Qf Lie algebras; (7)
a view of Weyl as the leading exponent of a particular mathematical style cultivated in Hilbert's
Gottingen; (8) how Weyl's work on general relativity paved the way for his investigations of the
structure theory of Lie groups. The first three
themes will be familiar to those Who have followed
Hawkins's earlier work, to which he refers the
reader in several places in the first two parts of the
present study. Roughly two-thirds of its contents,
Parts III and IV, take up the latter five topics, which
are substantially new. All eight of these themes have
considerable significance for Hawkins's overall
story. Unfortunately, the reader has to invest a
great deal of time and patience to see why. Perhaps
the author thought the book long enough already,
but he surely could have made it more accessible
had he chosen to sketch the overall contours of his
argument in a lengthier introduction rather than
relying mainly on general summarizing remarks
made along the way, helpful as these certainly are.
Hawkins focuses primarily on mathematical ideas
and intellectual contexts, with rather scant (occasionally too scant) attention paid to interactions between the personalities involved. Part I thus examines the rich intellectual framework that led to the
modern theory of Lie groups and Lie algebras,
670

NOTICES OF THE AMS

beginning with Sophus Lie's own ideas and those
inspired by his work. In Chapter 1 the reader encounters what might seem like a rather bewildering chain of unfamiliar concepts: tetrahedral complexes, W-curves and W-surfaces, and Lie's
line-to-sphere mapping. Lie was absorbed by the
remarkable properties of his line-to-spheremapping
during his sojourn in Paris with Felix Klein
in 1870. Klein later described how Lie's mind lived
in these spaces of lines and spheres, flip-flopping
to and fro. Eventually, the properties he uncovered
by means of these obscure mental gymnastics led
him to formulate a general geometric theory of
contact transformations, a notion that found its way
into Klein's "Erlangen Program" in 1872.
All these ideas and many more are part of
Hawkins's account in Chapters 1 and 2, in which
he describes the origins of Lie's theory of continuous groups. According to Lie himself, this theory
was born in the winter of 1873-74, and Hawkins
carefully elucidates what happened during the
preceding period, the years 1869-1873, by dividing Lie's early career into two subperiods. Up
until the fall of 1872 he worked closely with Klein,
but afterward Lie went his own way, beginning an
intensive study of systems of partial differential
equations inspired especially by Jacobi's analytical
ideas. Hawkins sets out this periodization at the
beginning of Chapter 1, but without mentioning
the landmark work that came at the end of the
Klein-Lie collaboration, the Erlang~n Program.
Instead, he reserves this topic for the final section
of the chapter, at the close of which he emphasizes
that Lie saw the contents of Klein's Erlangen
Program as only tangentially related to his own
program for classifying all continuous groups.
Hawkins's periodization is both clear and convincing, but unfortunately his handling of this
topic tends to sweep a whole batch of problems
under the carpet, beginning with the controversial
status of Klein's Erlangen Program. To grasp what
was at stake, the reader ought to be told early on
about Lie's ambivalent views regarding the Erlangen Program, one of several contentious issues
that caused his relationship with Klein to sour
during the early 1890s. Given the importance of the
Lie-Klein partnership for Hawkins's whole story,
one would have hoped to learn more about their
sometimes volatile encounters as well as their
respective mathemati~al styles. Both were geometers who relied heavily on intuitive ideas, but Klein
tended to think in global terms, whereas Lie fixed
his attention on differential properties, ignoring
most global issues. Hawkins underscores the fact
that Lie's program failed to distinguish sharply
between the local and global theory of Lie groups.
Lie often tended to regard the latter as generated
by the former in a straightforward manner (as in
the case of the commutative one-parameter groups
VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

associated with W-curves that he studied with
Klein). Klein's Erlangen Program, on the other hand,
was exclusively concerned with transformation
groups that act globally on a manifold. As Hawkins
duly notes, Klein's whole outlook was deeply
rooted in projective methods, yet unlike Lie, he
emphasized the distinction between global and
local properties of manifolds early on and often.
As already mentioned, these key insights might
have been spelled out more effectively in an
introductory essay that surveyed some of the book's
major themes before exposing the reader to the
morass of technical information Hawkins draws
upon in making his arguments. With regard to the
Erlangen Program, for example, it should be emphasized that Klein did not originally conceive it
as a research program for continuous groups but
rather as a proposal to study systematically the
invariants and covariants of known groups. It has
seldom been noticed that neither he nor Lie chose
to pursue this core challenge directly after 1872,
whereas Eduard Study, who enters Hawkins's story
in a number of prominent places, did so beginning
in the mid-1880s. Study's work, however, was
quickly forgotten, whereas Klein successfully promoted the oft-repeated story that he and Lie had
already planned to divide group theory between
them back in 1872.
In the preface to his 1884 book on the icosahedron, Klein wrote that he and Lie decided to "divide and conquer" group theory after they parted
ways in 1872, Klein taking the theory of discrete
groups and automorphic functions, while his former collaborator took on the even harder theory
of continuous groups and their related differential
equations. By the 1890s this misleading story had
become thickly entwined with the then-emerging
mythology surrounding the Erlangen Program.
Later, taking up where Einstein and Minkowski left
off, Klein successfully promoted the idea that his
Erlangen Program actually presaged the mathematics of relativity theory, which he interpreted as
the invariant theory of the Lorentz group. By the
early 1920s thousands had read about the significance of Klein's Erlangen Program in Oswald
Spengler's Decline of the West. Thus, in the course
of fifty years this initially obscure expository essay
had been elevated to the status of a modern classic. Presumably only a few commentators studied
it closely, but this did not prevent several distinguished mathematicians (many with close ties to
Klein) from writing about the significance of the
Erlangen Program. Heroic feats have occupied a
major place in mathematical lore ever since Plutarch
wrote about how Archimedes single-handedly held
off the Roman legions who besieged his beloved
Syracuse. Debunking historical myths, on the other
hand, has rarely captivated mathematicians'
attention. Thus, it should not come as a surprise

JUNE/JULY 2003

that standard myths about Klein's Erlangen Program have continued to live on despite the fact
that Hawkins exploded many of these long ago. In
Chapter 2 he presents an abridged recapitulation
of his main findings regarding Lie's path of
discovery after he and Klein parted ways. Here
Hawkins carefully chronicles the crucial events
from 1873 to 1874 that led Lie to his theory of
continuous groups, an interest that had not yet
formed when he consulted with Klein about the
ideas that went into the Erlangen Program.
Appeasing the Analysts
In Chapter 3 Hawkins presents the key elements
of Lie's theory as well as the main results he obtained during the period 1874-1893. A few words
of caution are needed here. For the most part
Hawkins deals with Lie's theory as it appeared in
the three volumes entitled Theorie der Transformationsgruppen rather than citing Lie's earlier
papers. He points out that these volumes were
written with the assistance of Friedrich Engel and
published between 1888 and 1893. Although Engel
comes up in several other places in this study, in
particular as Killing's correspondent, Hawkins
skirts around the messy problems that developed
between Lie and Engel, his principal disciple, as a
result of that correspondence. At least one aspect
of their rocky relationship should have been addressed directly, however: namely, the extent to
which these three volumes adequately reflect
Lie's own thinking. Hawkins briefly recalls the kind
of working relationship Lie developed with his
new-found disciple when Engel came to Norway in
1884, citing Engel's own recollections. According
to these, they met twice daily so that Lie could
outline the contents of the individual chapters, "a
sort of skeleton, to be clothed by me in flesh and
blood" (p. 77). Hawkins further notes that the manuscript went through many revisions and that the
whole project led to a text five times longer than
originally planned. Still, he does not pursue a key
issue raised by Hans Freudenthal, who gave this
assessment in a biographical essay on Lie:

The nineteenth-century mathematical
public often could not understand lucid
abstract ideas if they were not expressed
in the analytic language of that time,
even if this language would not help
to make things clearer. So Lie, a poor
analyst in comparison with his ablest
contemporaries, had to adapt and
express in a host of formulas, ideas
which would have been better without
them. It was Lie's misfortune that by
yielding to this urge, he rendered his
theories obscure to the geometricians
and failed to convince the analysts (Hans

NOTICES OF THE AMS

671

Freudenthal, "Marius Sophus Lie",
Dictionary of Scientific Biography [New
York: Scribners, 1973],8:325).
Engel, the "ghostwriter" of Lie's three volumes
on the theory of transformation groups, must have
had a major hand in this process, aimed at winning
the recognition of leading contemporaries. Initially
at least, these "analysts" were, first and foremost,
the mathematicians closely associated with Weierstrass's school in Berlin, several of whose members
play major roles in Hawkins's book. Although he
discusses the misgivings Weierstrass and company
had about Lie's work, Hawkins never hints that
Engel might have played a significant role in the
dilemma Freudenthal described. Lie felt isolated in
Norway, and he was frustrated over the difficulties
he encountered in trying to find an audience for
his work. Klein and Adolf Mayer therefore sent
Friedrich Engel to aid him, and it seems likely that
Engel thought Lie's mathematics had to be made
more palatable for analysts. This interpretation
gains credibility from the testimony found in a
footnote on page 190. There Hawkins cites the authority of Lie's former student Gerhard Kowalewski
who claimed that Lie never referred to the three vol~
urnes written by Engel, with their "functiontheoretic touch", but rather always cited his own
papers when discussing
his work with others. If
so, one might well wonder whether Lie even
knew the contents of his
own "masterpiece" all that
well! Taking Freudenthal's
argument a step further,
perhaps Lie's real mistake
was letting Engel dress up
his geometrically inspired
ideas in analytic garb
(though Mayer had already been pushing Lie in
this direction before Engel
stepped onto the scene).
At any rate, by relegating
Engel to the background
in Chapter 3, Hawkins
leaves these interesting
Wilhelm Killing, circa 1890. questions unexamined.

Rivalry of Lie and Killing
In Chapter 4 Wilhelm Killing makes his entrance as
a rather different kind of exponent of the Berlin mathematical milieu. Killing was preoccupied mainly with
problems stemming from algebra and foundations of
geometry rather than complex analysis; his preferred
brand of Weierstrassian rigor thus had more to do
with the theory of elementary divisors than conventional epsilontics. Here Hawkins presents his by now
672

NOTICES OF THE AMS

well known argument regarding the wider methodological significance of Weierstrass's theory of elementary divisors. Within the Berlin school, rigor in
algebra meant undertaking an exhaustive analysis of
a problem, and for this purpose the theory of elementary divisors proved to be a crucially important
tool that enabled algebraists to go beyond "generic
arguments", usually based on counting coefficients,
that held only for the "general case". Such arguments
were particularly common in enumerative geometry, a field in which controversies over standards of
rigor abounded during the nineteenth century. As
an exponent of the new Berlin ethos, Killing demonstrated in his early work on space forms a deep commitment to exploring not just the general cases but
all the possible degenerate ones as well. In the closing section of Chapter 4, Hawkins contrasts Killing's
approach with Klein's tendency to shunt such complexities aside or, better yet, relegate them to one of
his doctoral students. In the foundations of geometry Klein was long content to explore only the standard Euclidean and non-Euclidean models, despite
the fact that already back in 1873 W. K. Clifford had
made him aware of topological differences that can
arise when considering manifolds of constant curvature. By placing Killing's work within the context
of Berlin's research tradition in algebra, Hawkins
adds a significant new dimension to his story, for
Lie was essentially a geometer turned analyst, but
most decidedly not an algebraist of Killing's caliber.
Moreover, after Cartan picked up the pieces of
Killing's work, two other leading Berlin algebraists,
Georg Frobenius and Isaai Schur, emerged to play
key roles in the story leading up to Weyl's breakthrough in the 1920s.
In Chapter 5 Hawkins carefully describes Killing's
ensuing research program, which took its point of
departure in the Riemann-Helmholtz space problem. This naturally led Killing to a systematic
analysis of r-dimensional Lie algebras based on
the degree of mobility attributed to rigid bodies
in an n-dimensional space. The background for
this program was sketched in Killing's 1884 essay
"The Concept of Space Extended", but Hawkin~
conjectures that by this time Killing already had
developed the approach and methods he took in
his four major papers from 1888 to 1890 on the
structure of finite-dimensional simple Lie algebras
over the complex numbers. Hawkins arrived at
this conclusion not only by comparing the earlier
essay with Killing's later work but also through
careful analysis of Killing's correspondence with
Engel, which began in late 1885 after the latter
had returned to Leipzig from Norway. Although
he describes this correspondence in some detail,
Hawkins neglects to say anything about its wider
repercussions, alluded to above.
Initially, no apparent signs of conflict arose, and
in the summer of 1886, shortly after Lie's arrival
VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

as Klein's successor in Leipzig, Killing met with Lie
and Engel. lie must have known all along that Engel
had been writing to Killing, but he apparently at first
saw the latter as a friendly rival whose work would
only enhance the stature of his theory. He changed
his mind, however, in early 1888 when he saw
the first installment of Killing's four-part study
and wrote immediately to Klein: "Mr. Killing's work
in Mathematische Annalen is a gross outrage
against me, and I hold Engel responsible. He has
certainly also worked on the proof corrections"
(Stubhaug, p. 368). Lie now reached the conclusion
that too many of his ideas had been communicated
to Killing by Engel, ideas Lie regarded as his exclusive intellectual property. In Lie's eyes, Engel
had betrayed his trust, and their relationship never
fully recovered from this bitter episode. The following year Lie had to be placed in a psychological
clinic, as he could no longer sleep at night. His wife
brought him home to Leipzig in the summer of
1890, but his condition did not improve until many
months later (for details see Stubhaug, pp. 350-9).
Hawkins is undoubtedly right that Killing's work
owed little to Lie's ideas: not only was it motivated
by an independent research agenda but Killing utilized techniques that lay outside Lie's repertory. In
this sense the misunderstandings that developed
between Lie and Killing had no direct bearing on
their respective contributions to the theory. Yet
these unfortunate developments were clearly related to lie's growing sense of disillusionment over
the reception his ideas had received within the
German mathematical community. By the early
1890s Lie was most unhappy about many things
in Leipzig, some of them purely personal, but others directly related to his standing among German
mathematicians. Since arranging lie's appointment
in 1886, Klein hoped to forge an alliance with him,
a new Gbttingen-Leipzig axis, against the Berlin
establishment. But the Norwegian wanted to avoid
tying himself too closely to Klein's network of
power. Eager to build up his own school in Leipzig,
he viewed potential competitors with suspicion. Regarding Lie's attitude toward Killing's work,
Hawkins mentions only the positive remarks Lie
made in 1890 (p. 172), ignoring the highly critical
ones from before and afterward (see Stubhaug,
pp. 382-5).
These circumstances strongly colored the last
phase of Lie's career, and all his writings after
1892 (several of which Hawkins cites in various
places) should be read with this background in
mind. In the preface to the third volume of his Theorie der Transformationsgruppen, published in
1893, Lie attacked several mathematicians at once
but most notably Felix Klein, about whom he wrote;
I am no pupil of Klein's. Nor is the reverse the case, even though it perhaps
JUNE/JULY 2003

comes closer to the truth. I value Klein's
talent highly and will never forget the
sympathetic interest with which he
has always followed my scientific
endeavors. But I do not feel that he has
a satisfactory understanding of the
difference between induction and
proof, or between a concept and its
application (Stubhaug, p. 371).
Not surprisingly, these remarks scandalized
many in the German mathematical community (or
at least outside Berlin). By publicly belittling Klein,
Lie not only put an end to their friendship but also
effectively severed his ties with nearly all his former allies in Germany. Probably he felt he had to
take such a radical step to free himself from Klein
if he were ever going to strike out on his own. At
any rate, this was no mere isolated outburst, but
rather part of a long-term shift of allegiances, as
Lie continued to cultivate ever-stronger ties with
the French mathematical community.
Cartan and the French Reception
Hawkins takes up this very theme at the beginning
of Chapter 6 as background for his discussion of
Cartan's thesis from 1894 on semisimple Lie algebras. One should note, however, that Lie's renewed
interest in the reactions of the French community
went hand-in-hand with growing disillusionment
with the reception of his work in the German
mathematical world. Lie sought recognition for
his theory, but he was not content with the kind of
support he got from the likes of Engel and Study,
who were marginal figures in the German community. Hawkins explains why the situation was, in
general, much more favorable in France. Gaston
Darboux had shown an early interest in Lie's work,
~nd in 1888 he encouraged two graduates of the
Ecole Normale, Vladimir de Tannenberg and Ernst
Vessiot, to study with Lie in Leipzig. Vessiot,
following the lead of Emile Picard, took up Lie's
original vision, namely, to develop a Galois theory
of differential equations. In fact, nearly all the
Frenc~ mathematicians were primarily interested
in applications of Lie's theory, not the structure
theory itself. As Hawkins shows, even Elie Cartan
shared this viewpoint to some extent.
Intellectually, Cartan's work was directly linked
to Killing's, and yet the spirit that guided the
Frenchman differed markedly from the ethos that
inspired Weierstrass's pupil, Killing. In Chapter 6
Hawkins asks why it took Cartan so long to return
to Killing's original program aimed at determining
the irreducible representations of all semisimple
lie algebras. The answer, he suggests, can be found
by examining typical attitudes of the Parisian
community toward Lie's theory as it became increasingly familiar to them throughout the late 1880s

NOTICES OF THE AMS

673

and early 1890s. What mathematicians like Poincare
and Picard valued most about Lie's theory of continuous groups was its potential applications to
geometry and differential equations. On the other
hand, they showed far less interest in the structure
theory and its related problems. Hawkins contrasts
the open-minded views of leading Parisian mathematicians with the sharp rejection voiced by Frobenius, who became Berlin's leading mathematician
after Weierstrass retired in 1892. The latter had earlier confided privately that he
considered Lie's work, presumably in the form presented by Engel in Theorie der
Transformationsgruppen, so
wobbly that it would have to
be reworked from the ground
up. Frobenius went even further, claiming that even if it
could be made into a rigorous theory, Lie's approach to
differential equations represented a retrograde step compared with the more natural
and elegant techniques for
solving differential equations
developed by Euler and Lagrange. Needless to say, the
leading French mathematiElie Cartan, 1903. cians felt otherwise. Among
the younger generation, Cartan showed the strongest
affinity for the abstract problems associated with
Lie's theory. Yet, as Hawkins convincingly argues,
even Cartan was not tempted to go beyond that portion of Killing's program deemed relevant for the
theory of differential equations, the remainder having only "artistic value", a term Picard and Poincare
used disparagingly.
In Chapter 7 Hawkins describes various transitional developments, many involving ideas that
were significant for Cartan's trilogy of papers on
semisimple Lie algebras from 1913 to 1914, the
main topic he takes up in Chapter 8. By the 1890s
Lie had managed to build up an important school
specializing in various aspects of his vast research
program. Hawkins focuses particularly on those
works bearing on linear representations of Lie algebras. Once again, Engel and Study enter the picture, although the latter's work on projective groups
never really came to fruition. By the early 1890s
Klein's Erlangen Program also became widely known
for the first time, as it was reissued in numerous
translations. The first of these, fittingly enough,
was produced in Italy, soon to emerge as the leading nation for geometrical research. Hawkins deftly
characterizes the work of Corrado Segre and his student, Gino Fano, both of whom pushed Klein's ideas
into the forefront of research in higher-dimensional
674

NOTICES OF THE AMS

algebraic geometry, Italian-style. The remainder of
the chapter deals with technical issues: Cayley's
counting problem in the theory of algebraic forms
and their associated invariants, and a subsequent
innovation by Kowalewski involving Cayley's notion
of weights that enabled Kowalewski to find a few
projective groups that leave nothing planar invariant. In Chapter 8 Hawkins pulls all these technicalities together, showing how these intermediate developments permeated Cartan's trilogy of
papers. By this point, the interplay of diverse mathematical ideas becomes almost dizzying, making
the author's mastery of the material quite wonderful to behold.
Weyl and Gottingen Mathematics
Still, Hawkins saves the best for last in four chapters centered on Hermann Weyl that bring his study
to a brilliant close. In Chapter 9 he deals with the
context of Weyl's early career in G6ttingen when
he was closely associated with David Hilbert and
his school. Thus, Hawkins begins with an account
of Hilbert's work in three fields of central importance for the story: invariant theory, integral equations, and mathematical physics. In his early work
on integral equations, Weyl extended the results of
Hilbert and Hellinger to cases involving singular kernels, and in his HabiIitationsschrift from 1910 he
developed the spectral theory for second-order linear differential equations with singular boundary
conditions, thereby generalizing classical SturmLiouville theory. Weyl was deeply influenced by
Hilbert's ideas and shared his mentor's universalism. This early work carried many of the earmarks
of Hilbert's G6ttingen school, whose practitioners
were mainly inspired by concrete problems and
potential physical applications (in particular elasticity theory) rather than the challenge of developing a general theory of function spaces. The true
pioneers of abstract functional analysis were outsiders like Maurice Frechet, Friedrich Riesz, and
Ernst Fischer. Weyl was the consummate insider.
Hawkins gives an overview of Weyl's mathematical career up to 1913, when he published Die Idee
der Riemannschen Fliiche. He then comes full
circle, closing Chapter 9 with a discussion of
Hilbert's brand of mathematical thinking. Hawkins
sees this, in essence, as a manifestation of what
Hilbert once called "Riemann's principle", according to which proofs should be driven not by calculation but solely by ideas. Personally, I think it
would have been better not to resurrect this terminology. After all, Minkowski said essentially the
same thing about Riemann's teacher, calling this
tendency the "true Dirichlet principle".
ObviouslyWeyl was heavily indebted to Hilbert,
as Hawkins aptly describes, but one should not
overlook other important influences. In his booklet on Riemann surfaces, Weyl emphasized the
VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

importance he attached to Klein's essay from 1881
in which the topology of the surface determines the
periodicity of the moduli directly. Weyllooked to
Einstein for inspiration in physics and Brouwer for
a vision of the continuum. Indeed, these intuitive
thinkers had a lasting impact on Weyl, who criticized the general tendency to sacrifice content for
form in mathematics, a vieW that flew in the face
of Hilbert's strongly held position on the foundations of mathematics. In 1921 Weyl made his
opposition to Hilbert's views known publicly by
announcing the "new foundations crisis" in mathematics, a controversy that pitted Hilbert's formalism against Brouwer's intuitionism. More than
two decades later, in his obituary for Hilbert, Weyl
once again distanced himself from his former mentor's views on axiomatics, which he saw as the
weakest part of Hilbert's legacy; what he admired
most were his contributions to number theory. All
this suggests that Weyl's intellectual indebtedness
to Hilbert was anything but simple, whereas
Hawkins's picture, based on their shared propensity for ideas rather than technical arguments (Riemann's principle) overlooks too many other important factors, including intellectual tensions. As
Hawkins's study demonstrates so well, Weyl never
aligned him-self with a school or a particular
methodological approach; he was always turning
to new and eclectic sources. Ultimately and perhaps
ironically, his work on the representation theory of
Lie groups owed more to the Berlin algebraic tradition than to Hilbert's ideas.
Work of Frobenius and Schur
Hawkins lays the groundwork for this theme in
Chapter 10, which deals with the contributions of
Frobenius and Schur. He also picks up some of the
topics introduced in Chapter 7 (Cayley's counting
problem and Kowalewski's theorem). After a detailed account of Frobenius's theory of group characters and representations, Hawkins offers some
speculations as to why Berlin's leading algebraist
probably never contemplated an extension of his
theory to continuous groups like the one Weyl
achieved afterward. He suggests that Frobenius's
animus against Lie's theory was so strong that he
probably wrote off work he thought was contaminated by Lie's ideas. Thus, Hawkins found no
evidence that Frobenius ever attempted to study
Cartan's work on semisimple Lie algebras, presumably for this very reason. Moreover, by the
time he completed his main work on group characters and representations in 1903, Frobenius
found himself caught in a losing battle with Klein,
who by now had both Hilbert and Minkowski at his
side in Gbttingen. Yet even if Berlin could no longer
compete with Gbttingen in the realm of academic
politics, the work of Frobenius and his star pupil,
JUNE/JULY 2003

Isaai Schur, exerted a deep and lasting impact on
the theory of Lie groups.
Picking up on Frobenius's theory of group characters and an 1894 paper on invariant theory by
Adolf Hurwitz, Schur tackled the problem of
finding a wide class of representations of GL(n, CC).
In the course of doing so, he found continuous
analogues to several of Frobenius's results for
finite groups and presented these in his 1901 dissertation. His supervisor heaped lavish praise on
this work, calling Schur "a master of algebraic
research" (p. 402), but oddly enough Frobenius did
nothing to encourage his pupil to publish it in a
mathematical journal. Although Hawkins devotes
considerable space to this pioneering study, he
also emphasizes that few were familiar with
Schur's results until the early 1920s. In the meantime, Schur devoted most of his efforts to finite'
groups, algebraic forms, and their associated invariants, topics Hawkins discusses in the remaining sections of Chapter 10.
There he portrays Schur's work as a continuation
of the Berlin tradition in algebra. He also argues that
Schur, like Frobenius, did not "look to the schools of
Klein or Lie for significant mathematics" (p. 404).
Perhaps this is true, though one should remember
that Hurwitz had been Klein's star pupil. But more
importantly, we should be wary of attributing Frobenius's polemical and often narrow-minded views to
Schur, who seems to have kept his distance from the
running ideological debates that preoccupied his
Doktorvater. Hawkins cites no provocative remarks
from Schur's pen. Instead, he shows how Hurwitz's
ideas inspired Schur's work and how he later collaborated with Alexander Ostrowski and Weyl, both
from the Gbttingen camp. Weyl's work built directly
on Schur's, but he also drew on another important
source of inspiration that Hawkins discusses here.
In 1897 Adolf Hurwitz introduced a new method of
integration in order to derive the invariants for
various continuous groups. Hurwitz devised a technique, later dubbed byWeyl "the unitarian trick", to
carry out the integration process on the bounded
subgroup of unitary transformations of SL(n, <C).
Hurwitz's methods lacked rigor, since they relied on
Lie's theory, but as Hawkins points out there was no
other theory that dealt with global issues. (It was not
until 1933 that Alfred Haar developed a rigorous
approach, one that also showed how the theory of
Peter-Weyl could be extended to compact topological groups.)
Weyl's Journey from Relativity to
Representations
In the final two chapters Hawkins describes Weyl's
intellectual journey from relativity to representations, concluding with an analysis of his seminal
papers from 1925 to 1926. Several elements of
this story can be found in Armand Borel's lecture

NOTICES OF THE AMS

675

"Hermann Weyl and Lie Groups", delivered at
the Weyl Centenary Celebration in 1985 2 (a text
Hawkins cites with praise in his suggestions for
further reading). Aside from this essay, though,
Hawkins had to rely almost exclusively on published
papers and some scant though suggestive hints
from Weyl's later writings in order to pull together
a coherent picture. One of these hints was dropped
in Weyl's 1949 article "Relativity Theory as a Stimulus to Mathematical Research" , in which he wrote:
"...for myself I can say that
the wish to understand what
really is the mathematical
substance behind the formal
apparatus of relativity theory led me to the study of
representations and invariants of groups." Borel began
his lecture with this telling
quote, but Hawkins provides
the first detailed look at the
story behind Weyl's words.
In 1916 Einstein unveiled
his mature theory of gravitation in a now classic paper
that began by laying out the
formal apparatus of the general theory of relativity: the
techniques of Ricci's abHermann Weyl (right) with solute differential calculus,
David Hilbert, circa which Einstein had learned
mid-1920s. from his friend Marcel Grossmann. As Hawkins recounts,
Grossmann was familiar with
the lengthy 1901 article in Mathematische Annalen
that Ricci and his student Tullio Levi-Civita had written at Klein's request. Whether or not Weyl knew
the Ricci calculus remains unclear, but he quickly
threw himself headlong into Einstein's theory, and
during the summer semester of 1917 he began lecturing on general relativity at the Eidgenossische
Technische Hochschule. At the suggestion of Einstein's friend, Michele Besso, he published the results the following year in book form as Raum. Zeit.
Materie, one of the enduring classics of relativity
theory. As Erhard Scholz has shown, a substantial
part of Weyl's intellectual journey can be traced
through the four different editions of Raum. Zeit.
Materie that were published by Springer between
1918 and 1923 (the first two editions were virtually identical). The third edition from 1919 incorporated his unified field theory for gravitation and
electrodynamics based on a generalization of Riemannian geometry. In the fourth edition of 1921,
familiar from the English translation, Space. Time.
2Armand Borel, "Hermann Weyl and Lie Groups", Hermann
Weyl 1885-1955 (K. Chandrasekharan, ed.), SpringerVerlag, New York, 1986, pp. 655-85.

676

NOTICES OF THE AMS

Matter, Weyl retained this theory despite Einstein's
vigorous opposition. But by the time he prepared
the fifth, he no longer had any faith that a pure field
theory could capture the intricate properties of
matter.
Still, Weyl did realize that the time was ripe to
reconsider another important physical issue in the
light of general relativity, namely, the properties of
physical space. Since Einstein's theory undermined
the classical notion of a rigid body, the fundamental starting point for the original RiemannHelmholtz-Lie space problem, Weyl formulated a
new set of spatial properties and showed that his
version of the space problem reduced to finding the
orthogonal Lie algebras associated with a nondegenerate quadratic form. As Hawkins relates, this
work from 1921 to 1922 brought Weyl into direct
contact with Cartan's earlier deep investigations.
He goes on to trace Weyl's growing interest in the
symmetry properties of tensors, a topic directly
linked to his earlier work on general relativity and
unified field theory. As was well known, the
Riemann-Christoffel tensor satisfies several symmetry conditions that reduce its 256 components
to just 20 algebraically independent entities. Weyl
was among the first, however, to tackle the general
problem of classifying tensors by means of their
symmetries (another was J. A. Schouten, whose
work Weyl detested for its "orgies of formalism
... [that] threaten the peace of even the technical scientist" [Space. Time. Matter, p. 54]).
Weyl had strong views about how to do mathematics and how it should best be presented. These
come into view in Hawkins's story by way of Weyl's
response to criticism from Eduard Study, who
claimed in the preface of his book on the theory
of invariants from 1923 that the author of Raum.
Zeit. Materie was "behind the times, and not just a
little" with regard to the modern theory of group
invariants. Study felt that Weyl had overplayed the
importance of the Ricci calculus while ignoring
Study's own forte, the symbolical method for generating invariants devised by Clebsch and Aronhold.
Weyl answered Study's charge with some polemical remarks of his own, but Hawkins shows that he
also went far beyond this initial response. Indeed,
his subsequent research on tensor algebra led him
to Frobenius's theory of group characters, which
he utilized as a tool for determining the scope of
the symbolical method Study loved so much.
Hawkins even tries to capture Weyl's state of mind
at the time, a perhaps dubious endeavor that gains
credibility, however, in light of Weyl's later assessment: "Here those problems which according
to Study's complaint the l!elativists had let go by
the board are attacked on a much deeper level
than the formalistically minded Study had ever
dreamt of" (p. 455).
VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

Emergence of Modern Lie Theory
The bridge from relativity to representations of
Lie groups having been crossed in 1923-24, Weyl
took up the general problem of developing a
global theory for the latter. In Chapter 12 Hawkins
offers a lengthy analysis of Weyl's 1925 paper
"Theory of the Representation of Continuous
Semi-Simple Groups by Linear Transformations".
Following this, he takes up Cartan's response to this
work, ending with a discussion of the joint paper
byWeyl and Fritz Peter from 1926. Drawing on the
numerous elements laid out in earlier chapters,
Hawkins nicely reveals the rich threads that Weyl
wove into the fabric of his theory. Soon thereafter
Cartan modified some of this work, bringing out
its more topological features. A more abstract
approach to universal covering groups was introduced by Otto Schreier in 1925, but neither Weyl
nor Cartan was aware of it at the time. The PeterWeyl paper laid the groundwork for applications
to functional analysis by creating a generalized
theory of Fourier series for compact groups that
admit a translation-invariant integration process
akin to the one Hurwitz had found earlier. This
opened the way for general Haar measures and
other developments, including von Neumann's
work on topological groups. As Hawkins notes,
Weyl took no direct part in these subsequent
developments, though he did make an important
contribution to Harald Bohr's theory of almost
periodic functions. He then ends with a brief
afterword mainly concerned with suggestions for
further reading.
This book is anything but easy reading, owing
mainly to the mathematical and historical complexities involved. Yet whatever its weaknesses
and however these might be judged, this study is
just as clearly a stunning achievement. Few historians of mathematics have made a serious attempt
to cross the bridge joining the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries, and those who have made
the journey have tended to avert their eyes from
the mainstream traffic. Most such stud~es have
focused on new breakthroughs in foundations, set
theory, abstract algebra, and topology, whereas
only scant attention has been paid to developments rooted in earlier work, like Lie's theory of
continuous groups. In my eyes the single greatest
merit of Hawkins's book is that the author tries to
place the reader smack in the middle of the action,
offering a close-up look at how mathematics gets
made. Of course, this story has a happy ending, but
what Hawkins shows is the surprising diversity of
approaches to and motivations for this work, how
it moved forward in unpredictable fits and starts,
with periods of buzzing activity separated by interludes of quiet stagnation. No royal roads, indeed,
though there was plenty of inspiration along the
JUNE/JULY 2003

way. Hawkins's account of this strange but wonderful saga resurrects a heroic chapter in the
history of mathematics. For anyone with a serious
interest in the rich background developments that
led to modern Lie theory, this book should be
browsed, read, savored, and read again.

The photographs on pages 670, 672, and
676 of this article are reprinted from Emergence
of the Theory of Lie Groups with permission
of Springer-Verlag; Thomas Hawkins; the
Department of Mathematics, University of Oslo;
Universitats- und Landesbibliothek Munster;
and Ernst Courant. The photograph on page
674 was lent to the Notices by Henri Cartan.

NOTICES OF THE AMS

677

Three Views ofPeer Review
The ways in which :rnathe:rnaticians communicate their wqrk aree~olVing ~r~sporise .

to 'technological ,adv:emces.The Notices puplis~edan ,articI~,' apoutel~ct!o~~ Journq.ls~
in .theOctober. 2000 issue.~d,anarticle~pouHlectroI¥c]Jreprint
.serversin the Jan-

uary2002.:isl3¥e~

.' ' ,

,": ,

<.' "~:': . ' ..

>/ ., ',' . '. ", .

A 1;rililiqqnalpart of~eJ~~l;Hicfltion,p'rpces~ iSfef:r~)ip~:Wh~t'ls~~ee~~e'7ew".
tQg,Cly?Wha~,~~olJ:1f1' it, bt}?l;l,qw DJigJ;tt. it ,J~v~lve?,.Th~!,£~t!c;e{ask~~.~W:2i'?J;~yt~~~~
to\\i{~te~hqrtpit}cesqntbi~the:rnt}irAt}sel\1It}<;:es,
a:PaJ.~<lJ;

Steven G. Krantz
One of the gratifying things about being a mathematician is that one exercises a considerable
amount of control over the world we live in. The
typical mathematician has a lot to say about the curriculum in the mathematics department, about
which students are admitted to the program, and
particularly about what goes on in the classroom.
Even better, most of us have a considerable slice
of time to pursue whatever scholarly interests may
capture our imaginations. It is really a pretty good
life.
The one painful part (unless you are a department chairman; then there is constant pain) is getting one's work refereed. Let us concentrate on
the peer review of papers. I am the managing editor of two journals and associate editor on two
more. I like being an editor. The process allows me
to help others to write better and to improve the
quality of journals that I care about. What is more,
I can (in subtle ways) shape the subject by what papers I publish and what papers I do not.
I could not possibly carry out this process without the aid of referees. I have neither the time nor
the expertise to judge all the papers that come
across my desk. I must have help. And there is really no alternative but peer review. The work of the
automated theorem-checkers not withstanding, it
Steven G. Krantz is chair of and professor in the
Department of Mathematics at Washington University
in St. Louis. His email address is sk@math.wustl . edu.

678

bjl?:w.

'"

. . . .,. .

is still necessary in our world to have an expert with
solid judgment review the work. There are those
who will argue that we should just throw everything
up on the Internet and let the world sort things out.
Well, power to the people and all that. But such a
system cannot work. There are already more than
50,000 papers published each year. In fact, that is
merely the number that Math Reviews handles.
The full number must be many more, and if there
were no refereeing, the number of papers would
be incalculable. If I lived in a world where there was
no refereeing, I would probably just gravitate to the
work of people my age whom I know and trust. I
would have neither the leisure nor the patience to
seek out the work of new, young mathematicians
to see what they have to offer. And this would not
be fair to the neophytes in the profession. The refereed journals help me to see what is worth considering and what is not.
If we had no refereed journals, how would deans
judge tenure cases? This is a very serious problem.
Deans are already quite skeptical of a journal that
lives on a PC on someone's desk. A dean whose
pedigree is in Celtic history is probably something
of a Luddite and is (in my experience) likely to be
most comfortable with traditional, hard-copy, refereed journals. Most deans are usually advised by
a tenure and promotion committee of about a
dozen faculty from all over the campus. These will
be senior people, most of them about as conservative as the dean. If a chairman must sell the dean
and his committee a whole new medium and set

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

of values before presenting a tenure case, that
chairman will be strictly out of luck.
We use refereed journals as the yardstick by
which we measure ·quality. There is no way in the
academic world to throw the spaghetti against the
wall and see whether it sticks. Somebody has to do
the work and take the responsibility and make a
judgment. It is sometimes agonizing and always a
burden, but we must do it. That is the only way to
maintain our sense of scholarly excellence and our
communal sense of purpose.
Nothing in life is perfect, and the peer-review system has many flaws. First, everyone is being asked
these days to perform more tasks with less time and
fewer resources. When an editor asks someone to
referee a paper, it gets thrown into the old work pile
and immediately forgotten. The typical scenario is
that once a month or so the mathematician picks
the paper up for fifteen minutes, flips through it,
and says, "Yeah, I've got to get around to this one
of these days." Since the editor is 2,000 miles away
and not in the putative referee's face, the task gets
shuffled to the bottom of the "To Do" list. Second,
referees (like all people) have their foibles, and
these manifest themselves in ways that can
be unfair. A paper by a famous person always gets
special deference. A paper by a newcomer at a nonprestigious university may be judged particularly
harshly. If a paper reflects on or scoops or does not
adequately reference the referee's work, that referee is liable to react emotionally. A paper on a nonfashionable topic may have a tough time getting a
fair hearing.
But that is why we have editors. A good editor
manages the refereeing process. The editor can tell
when things are not going well, when the referee is
not getting around to doing the assigned task, when
the author is not being treated fairly. The editor can
then make adjustments. A good editor can tell when
a referee's report is reliable and trustworthy; if there
is doubt, then the editor will get other reports. In extreme cases the editor may actually read the paper.
In most cases the referee makes a recommendation
for acceptance or rejection of the work, but the editor puts that recommendation together with other
information (including possibly other reports) and
renders the final decision.
What is a referee supposed to do when asked to
judge a paper? Of course, ideally, the referee reads
the paper word for word and checks every detail. I
can assure you that in most cases this does not
happen, and it is not practical to expect it. If the
author/paper is purporting to prove a famous conjecture, then everyone is extremely careful, because
it would be mortifying for all concerned to publish
an incorrect proof of the Riemann hypothesis or of
the Poincare conjecture. But for most papers what is
reasonable is for the referee (presumably a recognized expert) to spend a few hours checking the key

JUNE/JULY 2003

ideas, the exposition, the quality of the proofs, and
th~ overall credibility of the paper. In the long run,
just as the populists claim, the entire world judges
scientific work, and this takes place over a period of
years. The referee cannot serve as a surrogate for
the entire scientific community. Instead, the referee
serves as a sieve, so that only worthwhile material is
put before the readership of the journal in question.
To come to the point: The peer-review system is
all we have, and it will work well if we all participate
responsibly and manage it properly. It is not a system that works by itself. It requires knowledgeable
and experienced people to run it and adjust it
and perhaps to periodically reinvent it. During my
career we have experimented with blind refereeing,
double-blind refereeing, and many other variants of
the tried-and-true formula. And we will continue to
try new things. The peer-review process is alive and
well, and it is our collective responsibility to nurture
it and maintain it-for the sake of our subject and our
profession.

A Proposal to Reform Peer Review
in Mathematics
Greg Kuperberg
Over the past twenty years personal computers
and the Internet have led to great changes in
scholarly communication in mathematics. Email
has replaced paper mail, TeX now dominates typesetting, Math Reviews and Zentralblatt have gone
electronic, and many math researGh articles are
available from the arXiv [4] and other online
sources. These technological reforms have in turn
affected the social and professional organization
of the mathematical community. Yet in the midst
of so much change, the procedures of formal peer
review, as practiced by refereed journals, have
changed very little; they are about the same as
they were fifty or even one hundred years ago.
Some people argue that peer review is so impor- .
tant to research in mathematics that it should not
change, at least not any time soon. But I believe that
peer review will inevitably change along with all
other aspects of mathematical communication.
Here I will describe my proposal to reform peer
review, in particular to use the arXiv to leverage
reform.
In the idealized journal system, the diligent
referee first checks the main results of a submitted
Greg Kuperberg is professor of mathematics at the University of California, Davis. His email address is

greg@math.ucdavis.edu.
This piece is derived from IIScholarly mathematical com-

munications at a crossroads," by Greg Kuperberg, Nieuw
Arch. Wisk. (5) 3 (2002), 262-4.

NOTICES OF THE AMS

679

paper. If they are correct, the referee and the editor
then consider whether the results meet the journal's
standard. In practice the system is far from ideal.
Referees cannot be held accountable (although some
do an admirable job anyway). Many papers are
accepted on the basis of name recognition or out
of guilt, just because the referees sat on them for
too long. Authors need not take no for an answer,
because they can scout for journals that will publish them. Journal editors should serve as a second
line of defense, but in practice they are only slightly
more accountable than referees. (Again, some do an
admirable job anyway.) In the end, readers do not
know who refereed any given paper or why it was
accepted. Because papers can onlybe published once,
the system reduces peer review to simple binary
approval.
In my opinion, Math Reviews and Zentralblatt
are inherently more useful forms of peer review,
because the reviews are not anonymous. Their publishers do not agree with me; by their own rules,
reviewers are not required to fully referee papers.
But some do so anyway. Many mathematicians
know of notoriously mistaken papers that were
inexplicably published. The community is often
angry with the referees of such papers, but
anonymity protects them from the readers rather
than the authors. Typically Math Reviews sets the
record straight. My favorite example is the forthright review by Gabor Fejes T6th of Wu-Yi Hsiang's
inadequate proof of the Kepler sphere-packing
conjecture [3]. Even in the usual case when both
authors and referees do a good job, Math Reviews
obviously informs readers more than any referee
reports could, since the latter are confidential.
Enter the arXiv. The arXivwas created in 1991 by
Paul Ginsparg as a service for high-energy physics.
(Ginsparg was recently awarded a MacArthur Fellowship for his invention.) It has since developed
into a large, permanent, freely available digital
library with nearly 200,000-research articles in
physics and 25,000 in mathematics. The arXiv
'- .has been described in detail in the Notices by Allyn
Jackson [2] and elsewhere by others [1]. One feature
of the arXiv which is relevant to peer review is that
although most of its articles are contributed before
they are refereed, it also supports several journals.
Ajournal that pools its papers with the arXiv is called
an arXiv overlay; one of the most successful overlay
journals is Geometry and Topology [5].
In the presence of the arXiv it is relatively easy
to reform journals so that they function much
more like Math Reviews. If a journal is purely an
arXiv overlay, then it need not take possession of
its papers. So why should it wait for authors to
submit to it? It could instead allow anyone to nominate ("submit") any arXiv article for review, whether
or not it has been published elsewhere. For lack of
a better name, I will call such a review service an
680

"open journal". If an open journal reduces selection
to its utilitarian minimum, it should add some other
value for readers to take it seriously. It is therefore
natural for open journal referees to write public,
nonanonymous reports like those in Math Reviews.
(But reviewers who are not interested in a submission can reject it privately and anonymously.)
Openjournals have been tried before, both in connection with the arXiv and elsewhere. But existing
experiments lack a crucial feature: They are not
designed to substitute for journal names in the
author's list of publications. For this purpose an open
journal should do three things. (1) It should retain the
trappings of a traditional journal, such as an editorial board, an online masthead, and a bibliographic
citation style. (2) It should keep the author informed
of the status of papers under review. And (3) it should
prod editors and reviewers to attend to submissions,
as traditional journals do.
While many readers presume that referees check
the results of papers, in practice editors would
scare away their referees if they actually demanded
this. This inconsistency is only tenable because
refereeing is anonymous. My best idea to address
the problem is to have the reviewers check one of
three options:
1. I have checked the main results.
2. I do not doubt the main results.
3. I doubt the main results.
Some reviews might need to be cosigned to support option 1. Presumably option 3 would be rarely
used.
It remains to be seen whether the open journal
model will succeed. Or one might ask, Who will pay
people to do all of the work? I see two reasons for
guarded optimism. First, publishers pay the mathematicians who manage, edit, and referee traditional
journals very little or not at all. Most of the paid
work for a traditional journal is for typesetting and
distribution. Most of the incentive for the mathematicians involved is in credit for professional
service. In principle this incentive could also sustain
openjournals. Second, I think that once the arXivis
sufficiently established in mathematics, journals will
naturally evolve toward the open model. But I hope
that the mathematical community can plan this evolution instead of leaving it to fate.
References
[1] JAMES GLANZ, Web archive opens a new reahn of research,
New York Times (2001), Dl.
[2] ALLYN JACKSON, From preprints to e-prints: The rise of
electronic preprint servers in mathematics, Notices
Amer. Math. Soc. 49 (2002), 23-32.
[3] GABOR FEJES TOTH, Review of Hsiang, "On the sphere
packing problem and the proof of Kepler's conjecture", MR 95g:52032.
[4] arXiv.org e-print archive, http://arxi v. org/.
[5] Geometry and Topology, http://www . maths.

NOTICES OF THE AMS

warwick.ac.uk/gt/.
VOLUME SO, NUMBER 6

Alfvan der Poorten
Generally, a referee has to make one of the
following recommendations:
1. Publish essentially as is: the only changes necessary are very simple typographical matters
which can be changed by the editor.
2. Publish after author's minor revision: the referee
suggests points which must be changed before
the paper meets the standards for publication.
3. Publish only if the author makes major revisions. (Perhaps the paper is much too long or is
badly written.) The revised paper will be refereed again.
4. Reject. There is nothing salvageable.
These "Hints for Referees" [2, p. 36] are all very
well, but one might wonder just how to distinguish. So Don Knuth reminds referees that to be
publishable:
1. The paper should contribute to the state of the
art and/or should be a good expository paper.
If it is purely expository, it should be clearly
designated as such.
2. All technical material must be accurate. A referee
should check this carefully.
3. The article must be understandable, readable,
and written in good English style.
4. The bibliography should be adequate.
What Is Refereeing?
The unthinking view of the person in the street or,
for that matter, of the mathematician in the corridor is that the purpose of a referee is only to certify
the correctness and originality of an article's results.
However, no referee (unless, perhaps, assisted by
able and energetic graduate students) can possibly
guarantee that submissions are error-free or new.
In practice, it is commonplace for old results to be
rehashed-and a good thing too. Well known facts
only become known well by repetition, and, in any
case, occasionally a new proof of an old fact actually explains it properly. Republishing a result
may add to "the state of the art".
Refereeing does provide an imprimatur alleging
a paper has survived a certain rite of passage. More
important, refereeing is a mechanism for selecting
preferred papers from potentially suitable papers.
Refereeing moderates the quality of papers accepted
by a journal.
Correctness is primarily the province of authors,
not of their referees. As referees we are authors'
victims. We are not guilty of authors' crimes.
Alfvan der Poorten is at the ceNTRe for Number Theory
Research, Australia. His email address is a 1 f@math .
mq .edu .au.

JUNE/JULY 2003

An Editor's Duty
The notion that every submission must be formally refereed is absurd. There is no obligation on
us as editor or referee to convince authors that they
are surely in error. It's up to authors to compel us
to the view that their claims are not necessarily
wrong and, indeed, are likely to be correct.
Editors are responsible for more than just the
final decision to accept a suitable paper. They must
also recognize immediately that certain submissions plainly are unsuitable for their journal and
dismiss such papers promptly.

Archiving Is Publication
One must of course make one's work available to
the mathematical community so that the community may judge it and use it. It seems reasonable to
believe that publication in a generally accessible,
well-managed, and well-mirrored archive can do
that adequately. The arXiv is a fine example of such
an archive, inter alia because it is an exemplar of
relevant current best practice [1]; see also remarks
in [3].
Unconscionable Practices
Slow refereeing and severe backlogs in publication
should not be accepted as normal. Many journals
have editorial policies apparently formulated in
1953 and unchanged since.
By 1953 policies I mean a range of bad habits
from such simple misdemeanors as failing to
communicate by email and failing to invite response
by email for preference, to absurdities such as paying for snail mail to return copies of a computergenerated manuscript to an unsuccessful author.
Let me contrast such nonsense with a recent sensible experience. An email invited me to referee a
submission and suggested I might well already
possess the preprint (I did not, but was able instantly to download it from the website of one of
the authors). I was reminded of the very ferocious
criteria that would have to be applied-occasioned
by an atrocious backlog-and was asked merely to
scan the paper to determine whether it might possibly meet those criteria. In practice, I read the
submission carefully and provided a fairly detailed
one-page report, including a certification that in my
opinion the results alleged were unlikely to be
false. In all, my effort took me an hour and a half
(I can remember having taken longer to search my
office for a mailed manuscript that I had immorally
put aside until the next week), and the entire matter was resolved within the day. Of course, the
suggestion that a "proper" refereeing job had not
yet been done still grates, as does the fact that the
sheer size of the rather good paper I had read
meant it could not be recommended for publication. An electronic-only journal could have reacted
differently.

NOTICES OF THE AMS

681

HAFR AL-BATIN COMMUNITY COLLEGE
Hafr AI-Batin, Saudi Arabia
Under the auspices of the
King Fahd University of Petroleum &Minerals
Dhahran, Saudi Arabia

General Sciences & Studies (GSS) Unit
Hafr AI-Batin Community College is a young and dynamic
institution in the eastern province of Saudi Arabia. It's strategic plan
is an ambitious one, reflecting its aspiration to become one of the
leading community colleges in the Middle East achieving excellence
in teaching, training and development programs. The medium of
instruction is English.
Applications are invited for faculty positions at Hafr AI-Batin
Community College starting in September 2003 or February 2004.
Applicants should be well qualified, committed, and adaptable.
Successful applicants will be offered positions at Associate/Assistant
Professor or Lecturer level and will be expected to lecture at
Undergraduate/Associate Degree level and/or on the Preparatory Year
Programme level and also to undertake other duties as required by the
College. Applicants should posses a relevant Master's/Ph.D. degree,
hold an appropriate professional qualification with suitable industrial!
commercial experience. Applications from candidates with experience
preferably in the following areas are welcome:

Mathematics:
• College Mathematics
• Pre-Calculus
• Calculus
• Finite Mathematics
• Statistics
Physics:
• Experimental Physics
• Solid State Physics
Physical Education:
• Badminton
• Basketball
• Soccer
.Swimming
• Volleyball
• Table Tennis
All contracts: Two year renewable contract, competitive salaries
depending on qualifications and experience; monthly local
transportation allowance and an end-of-service gratuity. Single status
is preferred.

Moderation
It is absurd to suggest that peer refereeing will or
can disappear. Whenever one selects one manuscript but not another, for whatever purpose, a
peer-review or peer-moderation process has intervened. Whenever one comments on a manuscript,
no matter how incidentally, that remark is a peer's
remark. It is reasonable for a nonexpert to ask that
papers be, at least implicitly, differentiated by informed comment and other peer-moderation or
selection processes.
Publish or Perish
It would be a good thing if the notion "peer refereeing" were to shed its ritual aspects, particularly
if the only purpose of emphasizing those rituals
is to humor tenure and promotion committees.
Nonetheless, it remains important to many of us
to publish our work in refereed journals. In this context, a virtual Journal ofArchived Mathematics ala
[3], formally certifying certain archived papers by
supplying those papers with referees' reports and,
say, with a JAM format file for show-and-tell purposes, clearly performs a service.
Journals Are Here to Stay
Journals will remain with us, often probably as no
more than virtual versions of their paper and bound
antecedents. Selecting their contents brings up the
traditional refereeing issues.
There is now and-all the more when almost all
journals are electronic-will be renewed opportunities for traditional print books featuring "the
best of.... "
Formal peer refereeing will survive, but its
strange rituals ought to become a diminishing
element of informed comment on published work.
References
[1] eEIe Recommendations, http://vwvw . cei c. math. cal.
[2] DONALD E. KNuTH, TRACY LARRABEE, and PAUL M. ROBERTS,
Mathematical writing, MAA Notes 14, Math. Assoc.
America, 1989.
[3] GREG KUPERBERG, Scholarly mathematical communications at a crossroads, Nieuw Arch. Wisk. (5) 3 (2002),
262-4; arXiv:math.HOj0210144.

Benefits: Married and single status appointments (please note:
there are no International School facilities in Hafr AI-Satin for school
age children); rent free, air conditioned, furnished accommodation
including basic utilities; two months paid summer leave each year;
annual flights.
To apply: Mail, fax or e-mail cover letter, detailed CV/resume to:

Dean, Faculty & Personnel Affairs
King Fahd University of Petroleum & Minerals,
Dhahran 31261, Saudi Arabia
DEPT. REF. NO.: HBCC-2317
Fax: (+966-3) 860-2429 E-Mail:faculty@kfupm.edu.sa
Please quote the position and relevant DEPT. REF. NO. in all correspondence.

682

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

Staffing Shifts in
Mathematical Sciences
Departments, 1990-2000
David]. Lutzer and]ames ~ Maxwell

A 1997 Notices article [6] showed that between
1990 and 1996 there was a 27% decline in the number of tenure-eligible (TE) positions in the nation's
doctoral mathematics departments and a roughly
30% decline in the number of TE positions in the
nation's master's and bachelor's departments combined.l Data from the AMS-ASA-IMS-MAA annual
surveys and data from [4] show that these declines
were not offset by an increase in the number of
tenured faculty members. The 1997 article noted
that in doctoral departments there was substantial
growth in a group that has since come to be called
"other full-time" (OFT) faculty, i.e., faculty who are
full-time but who are not tenured and not tenureeligible. (The OFT category includes, for example,
visiting faculty, postdoctoral appointees, and instructors who are not in the tenure stream.) By
contrast, the 1997 article noted that in master's and
bachelor's departments combined there was essentially no change in the number of OFT faculty
David]. Lutzer is professor of mathematics at the College
of William and Mary. His email address is Lutzer@
math.wm.edu.

James W Maxwell is associate executive director at the
American Mathematical Society. His email address is

positions between fall 1990 and fall 1996. Finally,
contrary to popular wisdom, [6] found essentially
no increase in the use of part-time faculty by mathematics departments between 1990 and 1996. (Indeed, figures from [4] suggest that there was a
substantial decline in the number of part-time facultybetween 1990 and 1995. See Table 8 below.)
In this article we use data from CBMS2000 [5],2
a recently completed survey of undergraduate
mathematical sciences in the nation's bachelor's,
master's, and doctoral departments, to show
that between fall 1995 and fall 2000 all types of
mathematical sciences departments substantially
expanded their use of OFT faculty and greatly expanded their use of part-time faculty members
at the same time that most types of departments
further decreased their number of permanent (i.e.,
tenured and tenure-eligible) faculty members.
Faculty Totals from CBMS2000 3 .
CBMS2000 found that the total number of fulltime faculty (tenured, tenure-eligible, and other
full-time) in bachelor's, master's, and doctoral
mathematical sciences departments rose by about
4% between 1995 and 2000, thereby returning to
about 98% of the total number in 1990 [1], and

jwm@ams.arg.
1 The 1997 article [6J was based on AMS-IMS-MAA Annual

Survey data. In [6J and throughout this paper, the term
Umathematics department" includes departments of mathematics, mathematics and statistics, applied mathematics,
and mathematical sciences. Departments are classified
as doctoral, master's, or bachelor's, based on the highest
degree they offer. A position is tenure-eligible (TE) if it is
in the tenure track but is not tenured.
JUNE/JULY 2003

2 The CBMS2000 survey was an NSF-funded survey that

is the most recent in a series of quinquennial national
studies of bachelor's, master's, and doctoral mathematical sciences and statistics departments in the U.S. sponsored
by the Conference Board for the Mathematical Sciences
(CBMS).
3 Except where specifically noted, data in subsequent
tables is drawn from CBMS2000.

NOTICES OF THE AMS

683

revealed how different types of departments
changed. See Table 1.

Table 1: CBMS2000 totals
offull-time mathematics faculty,
by year and type of department.
Year

Total
full-time
faculty

Doctoral
depts.
total

Master's
depts.
total

Bachelor's
depts.
total

Fall 1990
Fall 1995
Fall 2000

19,411
18,248
19,007

6,427
6,221
6,703

5,058
4,765
5,001

7,926
7,262
7,303

with 1990 figures is not possible. Comparison of
the three tables shows that the number of faculty
members who are neither tenured nor tenureeligible has increased substantially in every type of
department and that the overall shift from permanent (Le., tenured and tenure-eligible) faculty to
temporary faculty is most pronounced in the nation's bachelor's-level mathematics departments.

Table 4: Numbers offull-time
mathematics faculty in doctoral
departments in fall 1995 and fall 2000
by type of appointment, and
percentage change from 1995 to 2000.

More interesting than the totals in Table 1 are
the changes within different appointment categories
between fall 1995 and fall 2000 (see Table 2).
(Unfortunately, the CBMS surveys can offer no
direct comparison with 1990 figures, because before 1995 CBMS surveys combined "tenure-eligible"
and "other full-time" into a single category.) Note
that by fall 2000 the number of OFT faculty in
mathematics departments exceeded the number
of tenure-eligible faculty.

Tenured
faculty

Tenureeligible
faculty

Tenured
plus
tenureeligible
total

Other
full-time
faculty

Fall 1995
Fall 2000

12,779
12,335

3,329
3,136

16,108
15,471

2,140
3,536

Change,
1995 to

-3.5%

-5.8%

-4%

+65%

Tenured

Tenureeligible

Tenured
plus
tenureeligible

Other
full-time

Fall 1995
Fall 2000

4,691
4,718

772
803

5,463
5,521

758
1,182

Change,
1995 to

+0.6%

+4%

+1%

+56%

2000

Table 2: Total full-time mathematics
faculty by type of appointment,
fall 1995 and fall 2000, and
percentage change from 1995 to 2000.
Year

Doctoral
depts.

Table 5: Numbers offull-time
mathematics faculty in
master's departments in fall 1995
and fall 2000 by type of appointment,
and percentage change from 1995 to 2000.

2000

Master's
depts.

Tenured

Tenureeligible

Tenured
plus
tenureeligible

Other
full-time

Fall 1995
Fall 2000

3,220
3,070

812
862

4,032
3,932

733
1,069

Change,
1995 to

-4.7%

+6%

-2.5%

+46%

2000

Changes between 1995 and 2000 in the way
the four-year colleges and universities staff their
mathematics departments can also be seen by
comparing the percentage of all full-time faculty
members who are tenured, tenure-eligible, and
other full-time (OFT). That data appears in
Table 3.

Table 6: Numbers offull-time
mathematics faculty in bachelor's
departments in fall 1995 and fall 2000
by type of appointment, and percentage
change between 1995 and 2000.

Table 3: Percentage of all full-time
mathematics faculty who are tenured,
tenure-eligible, and other full-time (OFT)
in 1995 and 2000.

Bachelor's
depts.

Tenured

Tenureeligible

Tenured
plus
tenureeligible

Other
full-time

Year

Tenured

Tenure-eligible

OFT

Fall 1995
Fall 2000

4,868
4,547

1,745
1,471

6,613
6,018

649
1,285

Fall 1995
Fall 2000

70.0%
64.9%

18.2%
16.5%

11.7%
18.6%

Change,
1995 to

-6.6%

-15.7%

-9%

+98%

2000

Tables 4, 5, and 6 present data that compare the
fall faculty numbers in various kinds of departments for 1995 and 2000. Once again, comparison

684

Table 7 presents the figures from Tables 4, 5, and
6 in terms of the percentage of faculty in various

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

types of departments who hold different types of
appointments. The figures show a decline in
tenured percentages, -coupled with an offsetting rise
in OFT faculty. The percentage of tenure-eligible faculty remained essentially constant in doctoral and
master's departments, while in bachelor's departments both the percentage of tenured faculty and
the percentage of tenure-eligible faculty declined.

Table 7: Percentage offull-time
mathematics faculty by type of
appointment and type of department
in fall 1995 and fall 2000.
Tenured

Tenureeligible

OFT

Doctoral, 1995
Doctoral, 2000

75%
70%

12%
12%

12%
18%

Master's, 1995
Master's, 2000

68%
61%

17%
17%

15%
21%

Bachelor's, 1995
Bachelor's, 2000

67%
62%

24%
20%

9%
18%

Table 9: Percentage of mathematics
sections taught by tenured and tenureeligible (T&TE) faculty, by other full-time
(OFT) faculty, by part-time (PT) faculty,
and by graduate teaching assistants (GTA)
in 1995 and 2000. (Rows for fall 2000
do not add up to 100%.)

At the same time that there were major increases
in the number of OFT faculty appointments, there
was also a marked increase in the number of parttime faculty, as can be seen in Table 8.

Table 8: Number of part-time faculty
in mathematics departments
by year and by type of department.
Year

Doctoral
depts.

Master's
depts.

Bachelor's
depts.

Total

Fall 1990
Fall 1995
Fall 2000

na
1,065
1,276

na
1,456
2,437

na
2,768
3,448

6,786
5,289
7,161

Change,
1995 to
2000

+20%

+67%

+25%

+35%

CBMS2000 found that in fall 2000 there were
noticeable differences between tenure-eligible
faculty members and OFT faculty. For example,
the educational level of OFT faculty members was
quite different from the educational level of tenureeligible faculty members. Table F1 of [5] shows
that about 94% of tenure-eligible faculty members
had doctoral degrees in fall 2000, while among
OFT faculty members the percentage with doctoral
degrees was closer to 39%.

Other Supporting Evidence
The above tables and discussion are based on the
personnel section of the CBMS2000 survey. Other
sections of the survey provide results that are
consistent with those tables. For example, another
section of the CBMS2000 survey investigated
the question "Who taught various types of courses
JUNE/JULY 2003

in fall2000?" and comparison of that data with data
from previous CBMS surveys supports the conclusion that there has been a shift from
permanent (tenured and tenure-eligible) to temporary staffing within departments. Data on the
percentage of mathematics department sections
taught by various types of instructors appear in
Table 9, which is based on Table £12 of [5]. The
row percentages for fall 2000 do not add up to
100%, because there was a certain percentage of
sections whose instructors were not reported by
departments.

Dept. type & date

T&TE

OFT

PT

GTA

Doctoral, fall 1995
Doctoral, fall 2000

45%
42%

11%
16%

12%
17%

31%
21%

Master's, fall 1995
Master's, fall 2000

54%
48%

15%
19%

20%
22%

10%
5%

Bachelor's, fall 1995
Bachelor's, fall 2000

70%
60%

9%
13%

21%
21%

0%
0%

Total, fall 1995
Total, fall 2000

58%
52%

11%
15%

18%
20%

12%
7%

One very interesting issue in Table 9 is the
marked decrease in the percentage of sections
taught by graduate teaching assistants in the
nation's master's and doctoral departments. In
both the 1995 and the 2000 surveys, departments
were asked to report a section as being taught by
a graduate teaching assistant if and only if the
graduate student taught the section independently.
The decline in the percentage of sections taught
by graduate teaching assistants is not explained
by any substantial drop in the number of mathematics graduate students between 1995 and 2000.
However, it might be linked to the almost 18%
decline in the number of U.S. citizen graduate
students in American mathematics doctoral
departments that is reported in Table 6B of [3].
Other recent studies show that mathematics is
not alone in the decline in the percentage of all faculty who are tenured or tenure-eligible and that,
across all disciplines, there has been a substantial
increase in the use of part-time faculty members
[7]. Data from Table 3 of a report issued in 2002
by the American Council on Education [2] can be
used to compare the percentage of newly hired
faculty in colleges and universities with tenure
systems who were appointed to tenured or tenureeligible positions with the percentage who were

NOTICES OF THE AMS

685

appointed to what we have called other full-time
positions in 1992 and in 1998. Table 10 presents
that data.
Table 10: In public and private
four-year colleges and universities
having tenure systems, the percentage of
full-time appointments in all disciplines
in tenure and tenure-eligible (T&TE)
positions, and the percentage in other
full-time (OFT) positions in 199~ and 1998.
Data based on [2].
Type
Public 4-year
Private 4-year

T&TE

T&TE

OFT

OFT'

1992

1998

1992

1998

76.9%
76.9%

65.2%
65.1%

23.1%
23.5%

34.8%
34.9%

Why Care?
It is a fair question to ask why the mathematics
community should care about the increase in the
use of OFT and part-time faculty. One answer was
provided in a resolution proposed by the Committee on the Profession of the Mathematical Association of America (MAA) and passed by the MAA
Board of Governors in August 2002. The resolution
said, in part, that while nonpermanent faculty often
mak~ valuable contributions to undergraduate education,

[2] E. L. ANDERSON, The New Professoriate, American Council on Education, Washington, DC, 2002.
[3] D. LOFTSGAARDEN, J. MAxwELL, and K. PRIESTLEY, 2001 annual survey of the mathematical sciences (third report),
Notices Amer. Math. Soc. 49 (2002), 928-938.
[4] D. LOFTSGAARDEN, D. RUNG, and A. WATKINS, Statistical

Abstract of Undergraduate Programs in the Mathematical Sciences in the United States, Fall 1995 CBMS
Survey, MAA Reports 2, Math. Assoc. America, Washington, DC, 1997.
[5] D. LUTZER, J MAxwELL, and S. RODI, CBMS2000: Statisti-

cal Abstract of Undergraduate Programs in the
Mathematical Sciences in the United States, Amer.
Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2002; available online at

http://www.ams.org/cbms/.
[6] J W. MAxwELL, Changes in mathematics faculty composition, fall 1990 to fall 1996, Notices Amer. Math.
Soc. 44 (1997), 1321-1323.

[7] NEA Higher Education Research Center Update, Vol. 7,
No.3, June 2001; available online at http://www.

nea.orgjhejheupdatejvo17no3.pdf.

Over-reliance on temporary faculty
(whether part-time or full-time) can
decrease stable and continuous faculty
involvement in course and curriculum '
development, peer teaching review,
student advising, and qepartmental
governance, and simultaneously lead
to a shift of responsibility for outof-class departmental duties into the
hands of fewer permanent faculty memo, bers. In addition, the CBMS2000 survey
shows that temporary faculty tend to
have a lower level of graduate education
in mathematical sciences than do permanent faculty, and widespread use of
non-doctoral faculty can have an
adverse effect on the intellectual life of
departments. Finally, the decline in the
number of permanent faculty positions
can disrupt the professional development of new Ph.D. recipients who are
forced to be in job-search mode year
after year, as they move from one
temporary position to another.
References
[1] D. ALBERS, D. LOFTSGAARDEN, D. RUNG, andA. WATKINS, Sta-

tistical Abstract of Undergraduate Programs in the
Mathematical Sciences and Computer Science in the
United States: 1990-91 CBMS Survey, MAA Notes 23,
Math. Assoc. America, Washington, DC, 1992.

686

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

NSF FiscalYear 2004
Budget Request

The past couple ofyears have seen a greatlyimproved
budget outlook for the mathematical sciences at the
National Science Foundation (NSF). Still, fiscal year
2003, which began on October 1, 2002, has turned
out to be a difficult and frustrating budget cycle for
the entire foundation, including the Division ofMathematical Sciences (DMS). The main problem was the
congressional appropriations process, which should
have been completed by the start of the fiscal year
but which dragged on into March 2003. As a result,
the Bush administration had to release the fiscal
2004 request in February 2003 without the fiscal
2003 appropriation numbers to serve as a baseline.
In fiscal year 2002 the NSF designated the mathematical sciences as a "priority area" and pledged to
increase support for the field over the next several
years. As a start the DMS received that year a hefty
$ 30 million increase, raising its budget by 25 percent
over the fiscal 2001 level. The priority area activities
were to/grow in fiscal 2003, with funding for those
activities provided not just to the DMS but to other
NSF divisions to support interdisciplinary work
involving the mathematical sciences. The fiscal
year 2003 budget request also added an additional
$30 million to the DMS.
But a budget request is not an appropriation;
the request must pass through Congress, which
typically reworks the budget according to its own
priorities before appropriating funds. As a result,
the NSF appropriation often looks very different
from the request. As the congressional appropriations process for fiscal 2003 dragged on through
fall 2002 and winter 2003, government agencies
had to survive on budgets set at fiscal year 2002
appropriated levels. The DMS was left in the frustrating position of knowing the priority area would
receive an increase but not knowing how much it
would be. Without that information the DMS could
JUNE/JULY 2003

not begin the work of negotiating with other
divisions the joint funding of interdisciplinary
proposals; interdisciplinary research is one of the
centerpieces of the priority area, along with fundamental mathematical and statistical research
and education.
Adding to the anxiety was a move within the
Senate late last summer to reduce the requested $30
million increase for the DMS to just $10 million. The
Senate bill also directed the NSF to produce a
report about what had been accomplished with
the increases for the mathematical sciences. Such
a report seems rather premature, given that the priority area was so recently established. The Senate
action "was a surprise to me," said Samuel M.
Rankin III, director of the AMS Washington office,
because ordinarily Congress does not specify the
budget of items at the level of the NSF disciplinary
divisions. Rankin immediately rallied mathematicians around the country to write to their senators
and discussed the situation with contacts on Capitol
Hill. The crisis was soon defused, and the increase
to mathematics was restored. Rankin said that he
does not know what happened but speculated that
the cause was personality conflicts rather than
serious opposition to increasing funding for mathematics. "That's why it was relatively easy to
change," he noted.
When the appropriations bill was finally passed
by Congress in March 2003, the DMS kept intact
almost all of the $30 million increase that was requested; its budget went from $151.5 million for
fiscal 2002 to $178.5 million for fiscal 2003. "We
got what we wanted," Rankin stated. The conference report for the appropriations bill specified
the amounts for the DMS and the Division of
Physics; again, it is unusual for Congress to be so
specific about division budgets. After giving the
NOTICES OF THE AMS

687

amount for the NSF's Mathematical and Physical
Sciences directorate, the conference report states:
"Of this amount, $179,617,000 is for Mathematics
programs and not less than $222,169,000 is for
Physical Science programs."l Mathematics and
physics both did well; the amount appropriated for
the Division of Physics represents a 13 percent increase. But the instruction to the NSF to produce
a report about mathematics has not died. The conference report contains the following: "The Foundation is directed to provide, by August 31,2003,
a report which documents what has been accomplished as a result of the growth in mathematics
research funding."
William Rundell, who began as DMS director in
September 2002, went through this difficult period
just as he was learning the ropes at the NSF. At the
time of this writing, the DMS did not know exactly

how much of the fiscal year 2003 increase would
be for the priority area activities. Furthermore,
most of the other divisions in the NSF did not even
know what their budgets would be. As a result, even
after the appropriations bill had passed, the DMS
was still stymied in its planning for the priority
area. The timing is critical: If the funding targets
for the priority area are not met, future funding
could be in jeopardy. Rundell was clearly eager to
get going. "We have to work hard to ensure that
all possible opportunities are picked up," he said.
"The good news is that life is incredibly interesting for the mathematical sciences. An incredible
number of interactions are possible that hopefully
down the line will payoff. But the short-term ramifications are complicated."
The mathematical sciences priority area focuses
on three themes: fundamental mathematical and

1 The amount for the DMS given here differs from that in

the accompanying tables due to a small across-the-board
cut made after the appropriations bill passed.

Table 1: National Science Foundation (Millions of Dollars)
(1) Mathematical Sciences
Research Support

(2) Other Research
Support (Note a)
(3) Education and Human
Resources (Note b)
(4) Salaries and Expenses
(Note c)
(5) Totals
(6) (1) as a % of the Sum
of (1 ) and (2)
(7) (1) as a % of (5)
Tables prepared by Notices staff
Note a: Support for research and related activities in areas other than the mathematical sciences. Includes scientific research facilities and instrumentation and the Antarctic
program. Note b: Support for education in all fields, including the mathematical sciences. Does not include funds collected through Hl-B Nonimmigrant Petitioner receipts.
Note c: Administrative expenses of operating the NSF, including the Office of the Inspector General.

Table 2: Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (Millions of Dollars)

(1) Mathematical Sciences
(2) Astronomical Sciences
(3) Physics
(4) Chemistry
(5) Materials Research
(6) Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities
(7) Totals
ok Unavailable at press time.

688

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

statistical research, education and training in the
mathematical sciences, and interdisciplinary research focused on selected areas. These areas are
managing large data sets, assessing and modeling
uncertainty, and modeling complex nonlinear systems. The mechanisms for supporting research
in these areas include group research, interdisciplinary training programs, and partnerships with
other federal agencies. The DMS has already begun
supporting such research; for example, it has a
program funding collaborative research between
mathematics and the geosciences; a program called
Computational and Algorithmic Representations
of Geometric Objects (CARGO), jointly supported
with an NSF computer science division and with
the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency;
and a mathematical biology program jointly funded
with the National Institute of General Medical Sciences. The mathematical sciences priority area is
one of six such areas designated by the NSF; the
other five are: Biocomplexity in the Environment,
Information Technology Research, Nanoscale
Science and Engineering, Human and Social
Dynamics, and Workforce for the 21st Century.
The fiscal year 2004 budget request was r'eleased by the Bush administration on schedule in
February 2003. However, at that point Congress had
not yet passed the fiscal year 2003 budget.
Ordinarily the appropriations from the previous
fiscal year are used as a baseline for the budget
request, but because those numbers were not
known, the request uses the fiscal 2003 request as
the baseline. When Congress passed the fiscal 2003
budget in March 2003, it raised the NSF budget from
the requested level of $5.0 billion to $5.3 billion,
a 10.4 percent increase over the fiscal.year 2002

level. Once these budget numbers were known,
the requested fiscal 2004 increase looked paltry;
indeed, NSF would stand to gain just 3.2 percent under the terms of the request. Such a small
increase would be at odds with an authorization
bill passed by Congress in November 2002 that
calls for doubling the NSF budget by 2007 (see
"Bass Attends Signing of NSF Reauthorization,"
Notices, pages 380-1). To achieve the doubling,
the NSF budget would have to grow by around 15
percent per year. Whether such large gains will
materialize is unclear, but there seems to be
ample support in the House and Senate to give
the NSF a larger increase for fiscal year 2004.
"Overall, the prognosis for 2004 is good," said
Rundell. Having the mathematical sciences as
an NSF priority area has clearly been good for the
DMS budget. Many in the mathematical community would prefer to see the money focused on
core areas of mathematics, with less emphasis on
interdisciplinary research and education. But,
Rundell explained, "We got our request because
of the priority area, including the increase for
the core areas." Would the DMS have gotten such
an increase in 2003 without the priority area?
No one knows for sure. As Rundell stated, "I
firmly believe that, without stressing the utility
of the mathematical sciences in other disciplines
and without our willingness to tackle what is
becoming a national issue concerning the lack of
a trained scientific work force, we would not
have been successful over the past few years in
increasing the DMS budget."

-Allyn Jackson

Table 3: Compilation of NSF Budget, 1996-2002 (Millions of Dollars)

(1) Mathematical Sciences
Research Su pport

caris'tant DO"cirs----(2) Other Research Support (Note a)
Con-s-tan-tDofja';s""'~""""-"'-"""""-'-""- _

...

(3) Education and Human
Resources (Note b)

Constant Dollars
(4) Salaries and Expenses (Note c)
~'~"""""""''''''''''''''''''OT'O

_

..

Constant Dollars
(5) Totals

·Con·s-iant·Do-ila·rs _.. . ·. _.·
··~· ~

~~···

3370.2
7903.0

4026.5

795.4
449.7

903.0

172.9
97.6

202.0

$4459.9
2578.3

$5310.0

Current dollars are converted to constant dollars using the Consumer Price Index (based on prices during 1982-1984).
For Notes a, b, and c, see Table 1.

JUNE/JULY 2003

NOTICES OF THE AMS

689

Mathematical Sciences in·
the FY 2004 Budget
Samuel M. Rankin III
Highlights
• Federal support for the mathematical sciences
is slated to grow from an estimated $340.35
million in fiscal year (FY) 2003 to an estimated
$365.97 million in FY 2004, an increase of 7.7%.
• The National Science Foundation's (NSF) Division
of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) would receive a
13.1% increase, for a total of $201.87 million in
FY 2004 compared to an estimated $178.45 million in FY 2003.
• The Applied and Computational Mathematics
program of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), a Department of Defense
(DOD) agency, would grow by 15.3%. Other major
DOD mathematical science programs are not
growing. ,
I ntrod uction
Three federal agencies supply the majority of support for mathematical sciences research through
seven dedicated programs in the National Science
Foundation (NSF), the Department of Defense
(DOD), and the Department of Energy (DOE). The
NSF accounts for the majority of the support for
academic research in the mathematical sciences and
is the only agency that supports mathematics research broadly across all fields. The DOD and DOE
support research in the mathematical sciences that
contributes to the research and development missions of these agencies. Research supported
through these programs is primarily carried out in
academic institutions.
The DOD has five programs supporting mathematical sciences research and related activities:
the Directorate of Mathematics and Space Sciences
within the Air Force Office of Scientific Research
(AFOSR); the Mathematical Sciences Division within
the Army Research Office (ARO); the Mathematical,
Computer, and Information Sciences Division within
Samuel M. Rankin III is the director of the AMS Washington office. His email address is sm r@ams .0 rg.
This is an updated version of an article that appeared in
AAAS Report XXVIII: Research and Development FY 2004,

published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. The full report can be found on the Web

athttp://www.aaas.org/spp/rd/rd04main.htm.

690

the Office of Naval Research (ONR); the Applied and
Computational Mathematics Program within the
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA); and the Mathematical Sciences Program
within the National Security Agency (NSA). The
DOE funds mathematics through its Applied Mathematics program within the DOE Mathematical
Computational, and Computer Sciences Research
program.
The National Institutes of Health (NIH) also
funds mathematical sciences research. Funds are
administered through the National Institute of
General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) and the National
Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering (NIBIB) for research in the mathematical sciences
that support their missions.
Several other agencies have small amounts of
funding for mathematics research as it relates to
agency missions. These agencies include the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
(NASA), the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA),
and the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST).

Trends in Federal Support for the
Mathematical Sciences
FY 2004 aggregate spending for mathematical
research and related activities is estimated to be
$342.87 million, a potential increase of 7.7% over
FY 2003 estimated spending. Most of this increase
is a result of the 13.1% increase proposed by the
NSF. Except for DARPA, DOD agencies have had
very little increase in funding levels over the last
several years, and after adjusting for inflation
these programs have decreased in real terms. The
DOE projects no increase for FY 2004 over FY 2003.
The NSF is continuing to shoulder a significant
portion of the federal support for research in the
mathematical sciences, especially in academia,
where the NSF provides 68% of the support. The
mathematical sciences budget within the NSF is
growing at a much faster rate than the mathematical sciences budgets at other agencies. In fact,
budgets for the mathematical sciences in the DOD
and DOE are barely increasing, if at all. At the same
time that growth in the DOD and DOE budgets is
stagnating, the fundamental contributions of the

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

mathematical sciences to advances in science and
" technology continue to increase.
National Science Foundation
For FY 2004 the mathematical sciences continue to
be an NSF-wide priority area. The foundation has requested $89.09 million to carry out the priority area
activities in FY 2004, with $67.39 million of this
amount in theDMS and the remaining $21.7 million
provided throughout the rest of the foundation. The
NSF first requested that the mathematical sciences
be designated as a priority area in FY 2002.
The DMS is slated to receive a budget of $201.87
million in FY 2004. This would be a $23.42 million
increase over the $178.45 million (approximate,
based on FY 2003 appropriations language) the
division is to receive for FY 2003.
The goal of the mathematical sciences priority
area is to advance frontiers in three interlinked
areas. For FY 2004 the NSF plans to invest in the
following mathematical sciences activities: fundamental mathematics and statistical sciences, interdisciplinary research connecting the mathematical
sciences with science and engineering, and mathematical sciences education.
Fundamental mathematical and statistical sciences research includes themes such as dynamical
systems and partial differential equations, geometry and topology, stochasticity, number theory,
algebraic and quantum structures, the mathematics of computation, Bayesian estimation, and
multiscale and multiresolution analysis. Support
for research in these areas will be provided through
focused research groups "and individual investigator grants, as well as through institute and postdoctoral training activities.
Three broad interdisciplinary themes have been
identified for initial emphasis in the mathematical
sciences priority area: mathematical and statistical
challenges posed by large data sets, managing and
modeling uncertainty, and modeling complex nonlinear systems. Research in these areas will be supported through interdisciplinary focused research
groups, interdisciplinary centers, interdisciplinary
cross-training programs, and partnership activities with other agencies.
The mathematical sciences education activity
will foster closer connections between research
and education. Support for undergraduate and
graduate education and postdoctoral training,
coupled with curriculum reform, is a major part of
the mathematical sciences education activity.
Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR)
The Directorate of Mathematics and Space Sciences
provides funds for research and related activities
in the mathematical sciences in support of the Air
Force mission. Current program emphases include
cooperative control, quantum computing, and
Maxwell's equations. The AFOSR program includes
dynamics and control, physical mathematics and
JUNE/JULY 2003

applied analysis, computational mathematics, optimization and discrete mathematics, electromagnetics, and signals communication and surveillance. The AFOSR budget shows a decrease under
the administration's budget proposal.
Army Research Office (ARO)
The Mathematical Sciences Division is divided into
the following programs: applied analysis; computational mathematics; discrete mathematics and
computer science; probability and statistics, and
stochastic analysis; and mathematical modeling
and simulation. The Mathematical Sciences Division
plays an essential role in the modeling, analysis, and
control of complex phenomena and systems that
are of critical interest to the army. The areas of
application include ad hoc. and wireless networks,
image and scene analysis, and the testing and evaluation of new systems. The ARO budget shows a
modest increase over FY 2003.
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA)
DARPA's Applied and Computational Mathematics
program activities are structured around two interrelated central themes: development of wellconditioned fast algorithms, and strategies for the .
exploitation of high-dimensional data and mathematical modeling to enable virtual design. These
themes are addressed through the four program
areas: Integrated Sensing and Processing; Molecular
Observation, Spectroscopy and Imaging Using Cantilevers; Optimal Portable Applications Libraries;
Quantum Information Science and Technology; and
Virtual Electromagnetic and Testrange. The FY 2004
budget for the mathematical sciences would increase
by 15.3% over FY 2003.
Department of Energy
Mathematics is funded through the Applied Mathematics program of the Mathematical, Information,
and Computational Sciences Division (MICS) of DOE.
Research is conducted on the underlying mathematical understanding of physical, chemical, and
biological systems and on advanced numerical
algorithms that enable effective description and
prediction of such systems on terascale computing
sy·stems. Research in applied mathematics supported
by MICS underpins computational science throughout the DOE. For FY 2003 and FY 2004 the budget of
the Applied Mathematics program includes $ 5 million each year for two "thrust" areas: Genomes to
Life (computational biology) and Nanoscience. The
Genomes to"Life activity is a partnership with the
Office of Biological and Environmental Research; the
nanoscience activity is a partnership with the Office
of Basic Energy Sciences. The Applied Mathematics
Programs budget would not increase in FY 2004.
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
The NIH funds mathematical sciences research
through the National Institute of General Medical

NOTICES OF THE AMS

691

Sciences (NIGMS) and the National Institute of
Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering (NIBIB).
Currently NIGMS is supporting a biomathematics
initiative in cooperation with the NSF. Mathematical sciences areas of interest are those that support
the missions of NIGMS and NIBIB. These mission
areas include population biology, system biology,
macromolecular structures, and bioinformatics
for NIGMS; and computational science, model
development, and bioinformatics for NIBIB. Computational science includes development and
application of theoretical methods, mathematical
modeling, and computational simulation techniques in the study of biological systems. Bioinformatics includes research, development, and
applications of informatics tools and approaches
for expanding the use of biological, medical, behavioral or health data, including those to acquire,
store, organize, archive, analyze, or visualize data.
National Security Agency (NSA)
The NSA has a small grants program that supports
fundamental research in the mathematical areas of
algebra, number theory, discrete mathematics, and
probability and statistics. Other funds are available
to support Historically Black Colleges and Universities, Research Experiences for Undergraduates, and
a sabbatical leave program for university faculty. As

the world's largest employer of mathematicians and
constrained to hire only U.S. citizens, the NSA has a
special interest in encouraging more U.S. citizens to
study mathematics.
Office of Naval Research (ONR)
The ONR Mathematical, Computer, and Information
Sciences Division's scientific objective is to establish rigorous mathematical foundations and analytical and computational methods that enhance
understanding of complex phenomena and enable
prediction and control for naval applications in
the future. Basic research in the mathematical sciences is focused on analysis and computation for
multiphase, multimaterial, multiphysics problems;
predictability of models for nonlinear dynamics;
electromagnetic and acoustic wave propagation;
signal and imaging processing; modeling pathological behaviors of large, dynamic, complex
networks and exploiting hybrid control to achieve
reliability and security; optimization; sequencing
and scheduling; and construction of complex system software. The Mathematical, Computer, and
Information Sciences Division's budget would be
level in FY 2004.
I

Note: Information gathered from agency documents and from agency program Officers.

Table 1. Federal Funding for the ,Mathematica'i Sciences (millions of dollars)!
FY 2003
Estimate

FY 2004
Request

Change
2003-2004
Amount

Change
2003-2004
Percent

National Science Foundation
$151.53
DMS

$178.45"(

$201.87

$23.42

13.1%

Department of Defense
AFOSR
ARO
DARPA
NSA
ONR
Total DOD

$ 32.70
9.30
16.30
2.30
12.20
$ 72.80

$ 32.50
9.70
19.60
3.00
11.00
$ 75.80

$ 30.20
10.20
22.60
3.00
11.00
$ 77.00

$ -2.30
0.50
3.00
0.00
0.00
$ 1.20

-7.1%
5.2
15.3
0.0
0.0
1.6%

Department of Energy
Applied Mathematics

$ 23.00

$ 29.00

$ 29.00

$ 0.00

0.0%

$ 35.00"d(
22.10"d(
$ 57.10

$ 35.00''0'(
23.10"d(
$ 58.10

$ 0.00
1.00
$ 1.00

0.0%
4.5%
1.8%

$340.35

$365.97

$24.62

7.5%

FY 2002
Actual

National Institutes of Health
$ 35.00''0'(
NIGMS
17.40"d(
NIBIB
$ 52.40
Total NIH
Total All Agencies

$299.73

'''"This figure is estimated based on language in the FY 2003 Omnibus Appropriations Bill.
*'''"Rough estimate based on conversation with program manager.
lBudget information comes from agency documents and conversations with program managers. DOD FY 2003 and FY
2004 numbers are estimates.

692

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

Serre Receives Abel Prize

JEAN-PIERRE SERRE of the College de France has been
awarded the first Abel Prize of the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters. Serre is honored "for
playing a key role in shaping the modern form of
many parts of mathematics, including topology,
algebraic geometry and number theory." The prize
amount is 6 million Norwegian kroner (approximately US$825,000).
Serre's work is of extraordinary breadth, depth,
and influence. He developed revolutionary algebraic
methods for studying topology and in particular
studied the transformations between spheres of
higher dimensions. He is responsible for a spectacular clarification of the work of the Italian algebraic
geometers by introducing and developing the right
algebraic machinery for determining when their
geometric construction worked. This powerful technique of Serre, with its new language and viewpoint,
ushered in a golden age for algebraic geometry.
For the past four decades Serre's magnificent
work and vision of number theory have been instrumental in bringing that subject to its current
glory. This work connects and extends in many
ways the mathematical ideas introduced by Abel,
in particular his proof of the impossibility of solving fifth-degree equations by radicals and his
analytic techniques for the study of polynomial
equations in two variables. Serre's research has
been vital in setting the stage for many of the most
celebrated recent breakthroughs, including the
proof by Wiles of Fermat's Last Theorem.
Jean-Pierre Serre was born in 1926 in Bages,
France. He studied at the Ecole Normale Superieure
and received his D.Sc. in 1951 from the Sorbonne
in Paris. After holding a position through the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, he was
an associate professor at the Universite de Nancy.
In 1956 he assumed the position of professor at
the College de France.
Serre has been made a Commander Legion
d'Honneur and High Officer Ordre National du
JUNE/JULY 2003

Merite. He has been elected
to many national academies, in particular, the
academies of France, Sweden, the United States, and
the Netherlands. He was
awarded the Fields Medal
in 1954 (the youngest recipient ever), the Prix Gaston Julia in 1970, the
Balzan Prize in 1985, the
AMS Steele Prize in 1995,
and the Wolf Prize in 2000.
He has been awarded honorary degrees from many
universities, most recently
from the University of Oslo Jean-Pierre Serre
in 2002 in connection with
the Abel Bicentennial.
The selection committee for the 2003 Abel Prize
consisted of John M. Ball, Friedrich Hirzebruch,
David Mumford, Jacob Palis, and Erling St0rmer
(chair).
The Niels Henrik Abel Memorial Fund was established in January 2002. The main object of
establishing the fund is to award an international
prize for outstanding scientific work in the field of
mathematics. The prize is intended to contribute
towards raising the status of mathematics in society
and stimulating the interest of children and young
people in mathematics. The fund is administered by
the Norwegian Ministry of Education and Research.
Further information about the Abel Prize may be
found in "Norway Establishes Abel Prize in Mathematics", Notices, January 2002, pages 39-40.

NOTICES OF THE AMS

-Allyn Jackson

693

New from Kluwer Academic Publishers!
Kluwer is Proud to Announce the Addition of

BIT Numerical Mathematics to Our Mathematics Portfolio!!
The journal BIT has been published since 1961. BIT publishes original research papers in the rapidly developing
field of numerical analysis. The essential areas covered by BIT are development and analysis of numerical methods
as well as the design and use of algorithms for scientific computing. Topics emphasized by BIT include numerical
methods in approximation, linear algebra, and ordinary and partial differential equations, but BIT also publishes
papers in areas such as numerical functional analysis and numerical optimization.
• New Leadership - Editor-in-ChiefAxel Ruhl
• FREE 200-page supplement available with subscription
• 1000 pages of content

'~9wa'lailable -

Pay Pen View!

Needan article in a Kluwer mathematics journal ... but your institution doesnot yet sUbstribe? You' can e'asHy
get a 'copy of any article using Kluwer's Pay Per View option~ Just find the article oJ interest,click on the'View
,PQF button, and follow the simple instructiqns from there. You can view. over mathematics journals:online at
"'<www~kluweronline.com.
'
,

Kluwer Online is pleased to introduce the online version
of a milestone reference...

Enf;yclopaedia of Mathematics Online
Edited by

Michiel Hazewinkel
CWI, Amsterdam

The Online Encyclopaedia of Mathematics is the most up-to-date and comprehensive reference work in the field of
mathematics today. This online edition comprises more than 8,000 entries and illuminates nearly 50,000 notions in
mathematics. The Encyclopaedia of Mathematics is updated on a regular basis to remain a quick, precise source of
reference to mathematical definitions, concepts, explanations, surveys, examples, terminology and methods, which
will prove useful for all mathematicians and other scientists who encounter mathematics in their work.
Key features of the online version include:
• Enhanced searchability
• Concurrent desktop browsing
• Interlinking available
• Contains all three supplements

New Price and Special Offer!!
Customers who already subscribe to the print and/or CD-ROM version, can opt into the online version for half the
list price and will pay just $1650 (Euro 1650). Additionally, as a special introductory offer, customers who purchase
the Encyclopaedia of Mathematics before September 1, 2003 will receive a 40% discount.

Sign Up Now for Your Free 30-day Trial!
Kluwer Online Reference Works provide customers with digital delivery of vital resources in Mathematics.
You can search or browse through multiple reference works to find just what you are looking for.
Signing up for a free trial is easy! Just visit http://reference.kluweronline.com/for more details!

"

ktuwer
the language of science

Mathematics People

Henry H. Kim

John E. Meier

2003-2004 AMS Centennial
Fellowships Awarded
The AMS has awarded two Centennial Fellow~hips for
2003-04. The recipients are HENRY H. KIM, of the University of Toronto, and JOHN E. MEIER, of Lafayette College. The
amount of each fellowship is $57,000, with an additional
expense allowance of $1,600.
HenryH.Kim
Henry H. Kim received his Ph.D. in 1992 from the University
of Chicago under the supervision of Walter L. Baily. He was
a research assistant professor at Purdue University
(1992-94) and a postdoctoral fellow at the Mathematical
Sciences Research Institute (1994-95) in Berkeley. He was
an assistant professor at Southern Illinois University
(1995-2001) and is currently an associate professor at the
University of Toronto. He was a member of the Institute
for Advanced Study during the special year 1999-2000 in
automorphic forms and I-functions.
Kim's main research interest is in the theory of automorphic forms and I-functions via Langlands' program. By
combining the Langlands-Shahidi method and the converse
JUNE/JULY 2003

theorem of Cogdell and Piatetski-Shapiro, Kim and his
collaborators obtained many instances of Langlands' functoriality, such as functoriality of the symmetric cube and
the symmetric fourth, and opened the door to exciting new
developments in automorphic representations and analytic
number theory. He will continue to study Langlands' functoriality and its applications to analytic number theory.
He plans to use the Centennial Fellowship to visit Purdue University and Yale University.
John E. Meier
John E. Meier received his Ph.D. from Cornell University
in 1992 under the direction of Ken Brown. Immediately
after graduation he took up a position at Lafayette College,
where he is currently an associate professor.
Meier's research has touched on many areas in geometric
group theory, with a heavy emphasis on the use of geometry in studying group cohomology. He has gotten concrete
results on finiteness properties, duality properties, and the
asymptotic topology of infinite groups using generalized
nonpositive curvature techniques.
The Centennial Fellowship will allow him to spend the
year visiting Columbia University and the University of
California, Santa Barbara.
Please note: Information about the competition for the
2004-05 AMS Centennial Fellowships will be published in
the "Mathematics Opportunities" section of an upcoming
issue of the Notices.

NOTICES OF THE AMS

-Allyn Jackson
695

Mathematics People

Ferran Sunyer i Balaguer Prize

Awarded
The Council of the Ferran Sunyer i Balaguer Foundation,
at its meeting in April 2003, approved the proposal made
by its scientific committee to award the 2003 Ferran Sunyer i Balaguer Prize to FUENSANTA ANDREU-VAliLO and JOSE M.
MAZON, from the Universitat de Valencia, and to VICENT
CASELLAS, from the Universitat Pompeu Fabra, for the work
Parabolic Quasilinear Equations Minimizing Linear Growth
Functionals.

The most notable part of the work is a remarkable solution to a problem that was studied for ten years by the
best specialists in image processing. The solution represents important progress not only for this subject but
also for other areas that can be studied using the same
mathematical methods.
The prize was awarded during a ceremony that took
place on April 24, 2003, at the Institut d'Estudis Catalans
(lEC) in Barcelona. The prize consists of 10,000 euros
(approximately US$ll,OOO), and the monograph will be
published by Birkhauser in the series Progress in Mathematics.
The Ferran Sunyer i Balaguer Foundation (http://www .
crm.es/FerranSunyerBalaguer/ffsb.htm) of the IEC
awards this international prize every year to honor the
memory of Ferran Sunyer i Balaguer (1912-1967), a selftaught Catalan mathematician who gained international
recognition for his research in mathematical analysis. His
achievements are the more impressive given the serious
physical disabilities with which he was born.
The present scientific committee is composed of: Hyman
Bass, University of Michigan; Antonio C6rdoba, Universidad Aut6noma de Madrid; Paul Malliavin, Universite de
Paris VI; Joseph Oesterle, Institut de Mathematiques de
Jussieu; and Warren Dicks, Universitat Autonoma de
Barcelona.
-From a news release of the Ferran Sunyer i Balaguer
Foundation

Choquet-Bruhat and York
Awarded 2003
Heineman Prize
YVONNE CHOQUET-BRUHAT, of the Universite Pierre et Marie
Curie, and JAMES YORK, of Cornell University, have been
awarded the Dannie Heineman Prize for Mathematical
Physics "for their separate as well as joint work in proving the existence and uniqueness of solutions to Einstein's
gravitational field equations for a variety of sources and
for formulating these equations so as to improve numerical solution procedures with relevance to realistic physical systems."
The prize carries a cash award of $7,500 and is presented
in recognition of outstanding publications in the field of
mathematical physics. The prize was established in 1959
by the Heineman Foundation for Research, Educational,
696

Charitable, and Scientific Purposes, Inc., and is administered jointly by the American Physical Society (APS) and
the American Institute of Physics (AlP). The prize is presented annually.
-From an APS announcement

Green Awarded
DeMorgan Medal
The London Mathematical Society (LMS) has awarded the
2001 DeMorgan Medal for outstanding contributions to
mathematics to J. A. GREEN, of the University of Warwick,
for his contributions to group representation theory. Early
in his career Green gave the complex character table of
GL(n, q) in all generality. He later established the nowfundamental Green correspondence in the modular
representation theory of finite groups and developed the
axiomatic representation theory and the categorical
representation theory that has been at the center of much
of the most recent work in this area. His work on polynomial representations of general linear groups, in which he
exploited the Schur algebra, has been enormously influential. More recently, he has made substantial contributions to the study of representations of quantum groups
via a relationship with Hall algebras.
-From a London Mathematical Society announcement

Guionnet Awarded
Rollo Davidson Prize
The trustees of the Rollo Davidson Trust have awarded the
2003 Rollo Davidson Prize to ALICE GUIONNET, of Ecole Normale Superieure de Lyon, for her achievements in particle
systems and the relation between large deviations and
large random matrices.
The prize was established to commemorate the life and
work of Rollo Davidson and is awarded to young scientists
of outstanding promise and achievement for work in probability, statistics, and related areas.
-From a Rollo Davidson Trust announcement

Presidential Awards for
Mentoring
An individual mathematician and two institutional pro-

grams in mathematics are among the recipients of the
2002 Presidential Awards for Excellence in Science, Mathematics, and Engineering Mentoring. The awards are
administered and funded through the National Science
Foundation (NSF). They recognize outstanding individual
efforts and organizational programs designed to increase
the participation of underrepresented groups in mathematics, engineering, and science from kindergarten through

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

Mathematics People
twelfth grade and on through the graduate level. Up to ten
individuals and ten institutions annually may qualify for
the award, which includes a $10,000 grant and a commemorative presidential certificate.
LOUIS DALE, of the University of Alabama, Birmingham,
is the mathematician chosen to receive the award. Dale
received his Ph.D. in mathematics from the University of
Alabama, Tuscaloosa, in 1973. He has been an assistant
professor at Atlanta University and chairman of the Division of Natural Sciences (1968-70) and interim dean
(1970-71) at Miles College, his undergraduate institution.
Since receiving his doctorate he has been affiliated
with the University of Alabama, Birmingham, in many
capacities besides teaching: as affirmative action officer
(1975-81); as director of the Alabama Alliance for
Minority Participation Project (1991-present); and as
associate vice president, both for academic affairs
(1991-95) and for minority and special programs (1995-97).
Since 1997 he has been associate provost for minority
and special programs. He has served on many committees
concerned with minority student and faculty affairs.
The programs chosen are Arizona Mathematics, Engineering, and Science Achievement (MESA) and Strengthening the Understanding of Mathematics and Sciences
Institute (SUMS), both at Arizona State University (ASU).
The SUMS program, which was created and is directed by
mathematician JOAQUIN BUSTOZ, has helped more than 1,600
inner-city and reservation students prepare to study mathematics, engineering, and science. The MESA program is
a consortium between the University of Arizona, ASU, and
Estrella Mountain Community College that prepares students from fifty-five schools for mathematics, engineering, and science at the elementary and secondary education levels. The program is aimed at students from
underrepresented groups as well as first-generation and
low-income students. The ASU MESA program works with
more than thirty schools and several American Indian
reservations.
-Elaine Kehoe

2003 Sloan Fellows Announced
The Alfred P. Sloan Foundation has announced the names
of 117 outstanding young scientists and economists who
have been selected to receive Sloan Research Fellowships.
Grants of $40,000 for a two-year period are administered
by each fellow's institution. Once chosen, fellows are free
to pursue whatever lines of inquiry most interest them, and
they are permitted to employ fellowship funds in a wide
variety of ways to further their research aims. More than
five hundred nominations for the 2003 awards were reviewed by a committee of distinguished scientists. The
mathematicians on the committee were George C. Papanicolaou, Stanford University; Peter Sarnak, Princeton University; and Ronald j. Stern, University of California, Irvine.

JUNE/JULY 2003

Following are the names of the 2003 Sloan Fellows who
work in the mathematical sciences: IAN AGOL, University of
Illinois, Chicago; GUILLAUME BAL, Columbia University;
SAUGATA BAsu, Georgia Institute of Technology; DANNY
CALEGARI, California Institute of Technology; JAMES E. COLLIANDER, University of Toronto; RONALD FEDKlW, Stanford
University (computer science); WEE TECK GAN, Princeton
University; TOM GRABER, University of California, Berkeley;
CHRISTOPHER HACON, University of Utah; BRENDAN HASSETT,
Rice University; MICHAEL HUTCHINGS, University of California, Berkeley; AiExANDRU D. IONESCU, University of Wisconsin, Madison; TRACHETTE L. JACKSON, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor; NAVIN KHANEJA, Harvard University; ZHIQIN Lu,
University of California, Irvine; STEPHEN D. MILLER, Rutgers
University, New Brunswick; ROBERT MORRIS, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (computer science); ALEXANDER
POSTNIKOV, Massachusetts Institute of Technology; SYLVIA
SERFATY, New York University; LUMINITA VESE, University of
California, Los Angeles; Mu-TAO WANG, Columbia University; and ANDRZEJ ZUK, University of Chicago.

-Alfred P. Sloan announcement

NSF Graduate Research
Fellowships Announced
The National Science Foundation (NSF) has awarded its
Graduate Research Fellowships for fiscal year 2003. This
program supports students pursuing doctoral study in all
areas of science and engineering and provides a stipend
of $18,000 per year for three years of full-time graduate
study. Listed below are the names of the awardees in the
mathematical sciences for 2003, followed by their undergraduate institutions (in parentheses) and the institutions
at which they plan to pursue graduate work.
KATHERINE A. BOLD (University of Texas, Austin), New School
University, New York; NICHOLAS T. BRONN (Georgia Institute of
Technology), Massachusetts Institute of Technology;
LINCOLN j. CHANDLER (Florida Agricultural and Mechanical
University), Massachusetts Institute of Technology; DENNIS
B. CLARK (Harvard University), University of Chicago; KEVIN P.
COSTELLO (California Institute of Technology), University of
Waterloo; ANDREW W. COTTON (Harvard UniverSity), University
of California, Berkeley; NA1HANIEL G. ELDREDGE (Harvey Mudd
College), Stanford University; JAMES A. FOWLER (Harvard University), Cornell University; NATHAN D. GEORGE (North Carolina
State University), Massachusetts Institute of Technology;
JEFFREY H. GIANSIRACUSA (University of Washington), University
of California, Berkeley; KATHLEEN A. GRUHER (University of
Chicago), Massachusetts Institute of Technology; WEIHo (Harvard University), Princeton University; BRYCE Z. JOHNSON (Washington University), University of Chicago; RYAN D. KINSER (University of Kansas), University of Michigan; MELANIE M. LEE
(University of California, Los Angeles), Stanford University;
EREZ S. LIEBERMAN (Princeton University), Harvard University;
IVAN G. PETRAKIEV (Massachusetts Institute of Technology),

NOTICES OF THE AMS

697

Mathematics People

Harvard University; PAUL P. POLLACK (University of Georgia),
Princeton University; JOSEPH D. RABINOFF (Harvard University),
Massachusetts Institute of Technology; ROSALYN C. RAEL (Western New Mexico University), Cornell University; YANIR A.
RUBINSTEIN (Technion-Israel Institute of Technology), Massachusetts Institute of Technology; DEENA R. SCHMIDT (University of Akron), Cornell University; ELIZABETH A. SCOTT (Rice
University), University of California, Berkeley; YAKOV M.
SHAPIRO (Boston University), University of California, Berkeley; IAN T. TICE (University of Kansas), Columbia University;
DAVID P. VENER (Georgia Institute of Technology), Massachusetts Institute of Technology; ANDREW WAND (Georgia Institute of Technology), University of California, Berkeley; BENJAMIN T. WEBSTER (Simon's Rock College of Bard), University
of California, Berkeley; KIRSTEN G. WICKELGREN (Harvard University), Princeton University; HEIDI L. WILLIAMS (Dartmouth
College), Brown University; MElANIE E. WOOD (Duke University),
Harvard University; TATIANA V. YARMOLA (University of California, Berkeley), Cornell University; and JOSEPHINE T. Yu
(University of California, Davis), Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.
Editor's note: The institutions of graduate study listed
here are from the students' original applications. In some
'cases students will have switched institutions by the time
the fellowship tenure begins.
-From an NSF announcement

Guggenheim Fellowships
Awarded
The John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation has announced the names of 184 artists, scholars, and scientists
who were selected as Guggenheim Fellows from more than
3,200 applicants in the 2003 competition. The awards totaled $6,750,000. Guggenheim Fellows are appointed on the
basis of distinguished achievement in the past and exceptional promise for future accomplishment. Following
are the names of the awardees who work in the mathematical sciences, together with their affiliations and areas
of research interest: MICHEL C. DELFOUR, University of
Montreal: Intrinsic theory of thin and asymptotic shells;
NEIL IMMERMAN, University of Massachusetts, Amherst:
Applications of descriptive and dynamic complexity;
BONG H. LIAN, Brandeis University: Studies in mirror symmetry, geometry, and arithmetic; KEN ONO, University of
Wisconsin, Madison: Studies in number theory; RICHARD E.
SCHWARTZ, University of Maryland, College Park: Connections
between real and complex hyperbolic discrete groups;
FEI-RAN TIAN, Ohio State University: Nonlinear dispersive
oscillations; and JACK XIN, University of Texas at Austin:
Partial differential equations for processing audio signals.

Fulbright Awards Announced
The J. William Fulbright Foundation and the United States
Information Agency have announced the names of the
recipients of the Fulbright Foreign Scholarships for
2002-2003. Following are the U.S. scholars in the mathematical sciences who have been awarded Fulbright scholarships to lecture or conduct research, together with their
home institutions and the countries in which they plan to
use the awards.
HERNAN G. ABELEDO (George Washington University),
Argentina; DARL D. BIEN (University of Denver), Thailand;
JONATIIAN D. FARLEY (Vanderbilt University), United Kingdom;
KRzYSZTOF JAROSZ (Southern illinois University, Edwardsville),
Poland; HERBERT C. LYON (Black Hawk College, Moline, illinois),
Oman; SYED M. TARIQRIzVI (Ohio State University, Ulna), India;
and MARK R. WOODARD (Furman University), Barbados.
-From a Fulbright Foundation announcement

2003 Intel Science Talent
Search Winners Announced
Two high school students working in mathematics have
been awarded Intel Science Talent Search Scholarships for
2003. ANATOLY PREYGEL, a seventeen-year-old student at
Montgomery Blair High School in Silver Spring, Maryland,
won third prize and a $50,000 scholarship for his study
of knot theory entitled "Computation of Quandle Cocycle
Knot Invariants". LESTER W. MAcKEY, an eighteen-year-old student at Half Hollow Hills High School West, Dix Hills, New
York, won sixth prize and a $25,000 scholarship for his
project "A Combinatorial Proof of Seymour's Conjecture
for Regular Oriented Graphs with Almost Regular Outsets
0' a and 0" a".
-From an Intel Corporation announcement

National Academy of
Engineering Elections
The National Academy of Engineering (NAE) has announced
the election of 77 new members and nine foreign associates, including two whose work involves the mathematical
sciences. EUGENE W. MYERS, of the University of California,
Berkeley, was elected for pioneering research and leadership in the development of computational methods of
genome sequencing and assembly. ELAINE S. oRAN, of the
U.S. Naval Research Laboratory, was elected for unifying
engineering, scientific, and mathematical disciplines into
a computational methodology to solve challenging aerospace combustion problems.
-From a National Academy of Engineering
announcement

-From a Guggenheim Foundation news release

698

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME SO, NUMBER 6

Mathematics Opportunities
NSF. CAREER Program
Guidelines Available
The guidelines for the Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) Program of the National Science Foundation
(NSF) are now available on the World Wide Web. The program solicitation number is NSF 02-111. Information is
available at http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2002/nsf02111/
nsf02111. htm. Proposals must be submitted electronically.
The deadline for proposals in the mathematical and physical sciences is july 24, 2003.
-From an NSF announcement

Call for Nominations for
Sloan Fellowships
Nominations for candidates for Sloan Research Fellowships, sponsored by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, are due
by September 15,2003. A candidate must be a member
of the regular faculty at a college or university in the
United States or Canada and must be at an early stage in
his or her research career. For information write to: Sloan
Research Fellowships, Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, 630
Fifth Avenue, Suite 2550, New York, NY 10111; or consult
the foundation's Web page: http://www .51 oan. org.

development of a future work force prepared to work in
the increasingly many areas where these two disciplines
connect. To that end, the NSF invites supplemental funding requests for projects that intensify undergraduate education at the interface through research experiences and
changes in curricula and other educational practices.
Typical requests might include, but are not limited to,
activities such as: joint mentorship of groups of students
by biologists and mathematicians; opportunities for
hands-on experiences for mixed groups of students, e.g.,
experimental laboratory or field work for the mathematical sciences students, and mathematics/statistics and
computing laboratories for biology students; exploring
development of curricula, course materials, or digital
library components; international cross-disciplinary
research experiences for undergraduates; exploratory
research on interdisciplinary teaching and learning for
undergraduates; and workshops and other explorations
aimed at designing methods to advance interdisciplinary
education and training.
All activities should be linked to leading-edge research
combining the mathematical and biological sciences and
to the preparation of students for work in this intersection.
Questions about this activity may be directed to DMS
program officer Michael Steuerwalt, email: msteuerw@
nsf. gOY. Further information is available in a "Dear
Colleague" letter at http://www . nsf. gOY/pubsys/ods/
getpub.cfm?nsf03037.
-From an NSF announcement

-From a Sloan Foundation announcement

NSF Supplements for
Undergraduate Education in
Biological and Mathematical
Sciences
The Directorate for Biological Sciences, the Directorate for
Education and Human Resources, and the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) at the National Science Foundation
(NSF) are making available opportunities for the scientific
community to enhance interdisciplinary education and
training for undergraduates at the intersection of the biological and mathematical sciences. The goal is to stimulate
JUNE/jULY 2003

NSF Program on Approaches
to Combat Terrorism
The National Science Foundation's Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and the intelligence
community are coordinating efforts to identify bold new
concepts in basic research and work force development
in the MPS disciplines with the potential to contribute to
national security. The solicitation for Approaches to Combat Terrorism (ACT) is intended to inform researchers in
disciplines supported by the MPS Directorate-the Divisions
of Astronomical Sciences, Chemistry, Materials Research,
Mathematical Sciences, and Physics-that NSF welcomes
requests for supplements to existing grants, proposals

NOTICES OF THE AMS

699

Mathematics Opportunities
for small grants for exploratory research, and proposals
for workshops that promote the objectives of this ACT pilot
program.
The solicitation may be found at http://www . nsf.
gov/pubsys/ods/getpub. cfm?nsf03569. The proposal
deadline is July 17, 2003.

-From an NSF announcement

Fulbright LecturingjResearch
Grants
The Fulbright Scholar Program is offering lecturing/
research awards in approximately 140 countries for the
2004-2005 academic year. Opportunities are available for
college and university faculty and administrators, for professionals from business and government, independent
scholars, and many others. Traditional Fulbright awards are
available from two months to an academic year or longer.
A new short-term grants program, the Fulbright Senior
Specialists Program, offers two- to six-week grants in a
variety of disciplines and fields. Although foreign language skills are needed in some countries, most Fulbright
lecturing assignments are in English. About 80 percent of
the awards are for lecturing. Application deadlines for
2004-2005 awards are: August 1,2003, for Fulbright traditional lecturing and research grants worldwide, and
November 1, 2003, for spring/summer seminars in
Germany, Korea, and Japan for international educators
and academic administrators and for the summer German
Studies Seminar. The Fulbright Senior Specialists Program
has a rolling deadline. For further information contact
the Council for International Exchange of Scholars (CIES),
3007 Tilden Street, NW, Suite 5L, Washington, DC 200083009; telephone 202-686-7877; email: apprequest@
ci es . i i e . 0 rg. Information and an online application are
also available on the Web at http://www . ci es. org. The
Fulbright Scholar Program is sponsored by the United
States Department of State, Bureau of Educational and
Cultural Affairs.

-From a CIES announcement

Call for Nominations for
AWM Hay and Schafer
Awards
The Executive Committee of the Association for Women
in Mathematics (AWM) is calling for nominations for the
Louise Hay Award for Contributions to Mathematics Education and the Alice T. Schafer Mathematics Prize.
The Louise Hay Award is intended to recognize outstanding achievements in any area of mathematics education, interpreted in the broadest possible sense. The
award is presented annually to highlight the importance
of mathematics education and to evoke the memory of all
700

that Hay exemplified as a teacher, scholar, administrator,
and human being. The nomination document(s) should include: (1) a one- to three-page letter of nomination highlighting the exceptional contributions of the candidate; (2)
a curriculum vitae of the candidate, not exceeding three
pages; and (3) three letters supporting the nomination. It
is strongly recommended that the letters represent a range
of constituents affected by the nominee's work. "
The Alice T. Schafer Prize is awarded to an undergraduate woman for excellence in mathematics. The nominee
may be at any level in her undergraduate career but must
either be a U.S. citizen or have a U.S. school address. A letter of nomination for the Schafer Prize should include, but
not be limited to, an evaluation of the nominee on the following criteria: (1) quality of performance in advanced
mathematics courses and special programs, (2) demonstration of real interest in mathematics, (3) ability to do
independent work in mathematics, and (4) performance in
mathematical competitions at the local or national level,
if any. A copy of transcripts and an indication of the
candidate's undergraduate level should be included with
"a letter of nomination. Supporting materials (e.g., reports
from summer work using mathematics, copies of talks
given in student chapters, recommendations, etc.), if
applicable, should be enclosed with the nomination.
Five complete copies of nomination material for these
awards should be sent to either: The Hay Award Selection
Committee or The Alice T. Schafer Award Selection
Committee, Association for Women in Mathematics, 4114
Computer & Space Sciences Building, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742-2461. For further information call the AWM at 301-405-7892 or send email to
awm@math . umd . edu. Please note that nominations via
email or fax are not acceptable. The deadline for nominations for both awards to be received at the AWM office is
October 1, 2003.

-A ltVi\1 announcement

Call for Nominations for
National Medal of Science
The President's Committee on the National Medal of Science is calling for nominations for the 2004 medal.
The National Medal of Science is awarded to individuals in recognition of outstanding contributions to knowledge in the fields of mathematical, physical, biological,
engineering, and social and behavioral sciences.
The deadline for nominations for the 2004 medals is
June 30, 2003. Further information, guidelines, and
instructions for submitting nominations electronically can
be found on the website of the National Science Foundation (NSF) at https://www.fastlane.nsf.gov/jsp/
homepage/medal_sci .jsp.

NOTICES OF THE AMS

-From an NSF announcement
VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

Mathematics Opportunities

News from the Fields Institute

News from the IMA

The Fields Institute for Research in Mathematical Sciences
has announced its program for 2003-2004. The Thematic
Program on Partial Differential Equations will focus principally on problems that stem from questions in applied
mathematics and in mathematical physics. The subject
matter is chosen from active topics of research that are of
particular current interest. The fall semester of the program
will focus on elliptic and parabolic systems of partial
differential equations arising in mathematical theories of
superconductivity and of phase transition phenomena in
the physics of materials. The winter semester will focus on
Hamiltonian partial differential equations, in particular
hyperbolic equations and nonlinear dispersive evolution
equations that arise in mathematical physics and in
continuum mechanics, and on the equations of kinetic
theory that arise in the study of statistical mechanics and
of wave turbulence. A partial list of activities and their
dates follows.
August 25-30, 2003: Workshop on Calculus of Variations: Geometric Problems, Superconductivity and Material Microstructures. Organizers: S. Alama, L. Bronsard,
R. Choksi, R. Jerrard, and R. McCann.
October 1-4, 2003: Symposium on Inverse Problems.
Organizer: A. Nachman.
October 20-22, 2003: Coxeter Lecture Series. Lecturer:
Craig Evans.
November 14-18, 2003: Workshop on Patterns in
Physics. Organizers: R. Almgren, N. Ercolani, D. Henderson, J. Lega, M. Pugh.
Dates have not yet been set for the Colloquium on
Partial Differential Equations and the McMaster University
Britton Lectures, with lecturer Halm Brezis.
Four courses are also being offered in the fall term: a
Short Course on Mathematical Aspects of Fluid Dynamics,
instructed by W. Craig, C. Dafermos, C. Fefferman, and
B. Khesin; Partial Differential Equations, instructed by
W. Craig; Optimal Transportation and Nonlinear Dynamics, instructed by R. McCann; and Wave Propagation,
instructed by C. Sulem. For more detailed information,
including funding opportunities from The Fields Institute
and the National Science Foundation, see the website

The 2003-2004 program at the Institute for Mathematical Sciences and its Applications (IMA) is "Probability and Statistics in Complex Systems: Genomics, Networks, and Financial
Engineering". The fall quarter will focus on genomics, the
winter quarter on communication networks, and the spring
quarter on financial engineering. The schedule for the fall
quarter, including dates and topics of workshops, is as
follows:
September 15-19, 2003: Tutorial on Tools for Model and
Data Integration in the Genome Sciences.
September 29-0ctober 3, 2003: Workshop on Statistical
Methods for Gene Expression: Microarrays and Proteomics.
October 20-24, 2003: Joint IMA/RECOMB (Research in
Computational Molecular Biology) Workshop on Comparative Genomics.
November 17-21, 2003: Workshop on Networks and
the Population Dynamics of Disease Transmission.
The organizing committee consists of Tom Kurtz
(University of Wisconsin, Madison), Marco Avellaneda
(Courant Institute, New York University), Bruce' Hajek
(University of Illinois, Urbana), Richard Karp (University of
California, Berkeley), Sallie Keller-McNulty (Los Alamos
National Laboratories), Andrew Lo (Massachusetts Institute
of Technology), Michael Newton (University of Wisconsin,
Madison), Simon Tavare (University of Southern California),
and Walter Willinger (AT&T Laboratories). Further information and application forms are available from

http://www.ima.umn.edu/complex.
-From an IMA announcement

http://www.fields.utoronto.ca/programs/
scientific/03-04/pde/.
The Fields Institute invites applications for postdoctoral fellowship positions at the institute for the 2004-2005
academic year. These fellowships provide an opportunity
to spend at least one year engaged in research and participating in the research activities of the institute.
Applications for the Program on String Theory should be
received by january 2, 2004. Applicants seeking postdoctoral fellowships funded by other agencies (such as
NSERC and international fellowships) should request The
Fields Institute as their proposed location of tenure and
should apply to The Fields Institute for a letter of invitation. For further information see http://www . fi e 1 ds .

utoronto.ca/proposals/postdoc.html.
-From a Fields Institute announcement
JUNE/jULY 2003

NOTICES OF THE AMS

701

For Your Information

Peter Goddard Named
lAS Director

Change in Procedures for 2003
AMS Elections

The Institute for Advanced Study (lAS) in Princeton has
announced that Peter Goddard will become its eighth
director as of January 1, 2004. Goddard, a mathematical
physicist, is currently master of St. John's College at
the University of Cambridge, where he also serves as a
professor of theoretical physics in the Department of
Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics.
Goddard's research work is in the areas of string theory
and conformal field theory. He has also developed extensive skills as an administrator. He played a key role in the
creation and establishment of the Isaac Newton Institute
for Mathematical Sciences, which opened in July 1992, and
served as its first deputy director during 1991-94.
Goddard will succeed the current lAS director, Phillip
Griffiths, who will become a permanent member of the lAS
School of Mathematics.

As part of AMS elections for 2003, members will have the
option of voting either online or by the traditional paper
ballot. All AMS members who are open to receiving email
from the AMS will be contacted in May and given the
opportunity to choose to receive a paper ballot; otherwise
their voting instructions will be emailed to them at the start
of elections in early September. Members who receive the
traditional paper ballot will·still have the option of casting their votes online. It is anticipated that the availability of online voting will provide a much appreciated convenience to AMS members, especially the approximately
7,000 AMS members who live outside of the United States.
-Robf!rt Daverman, AMS secretary

-Allyn Jackson

James Carlson Named
Clay Institute President
James A. Carlson of the University of Utah has been
appointed president of the Clay Mathematics Institute
(CMI), effective August 2003.
Carlson received his Ph.D. from Princeton University
in 1971. Prior to joining the mathematics department at
the University of Utah in 1975, Carlson held positions of
assistant professor at Stanford University (1971-73) and
Brandeis University (1973-75). His research interests span
the areas of analysis, complex geometry, and topology.
Carlson succeeds Arthur Jaffe, of Harvard University,
who stepped down from the post in late 2002.
The CMI is a private, nonprofit foundation dedicated to
increasing and disseminating mathematical knowledge.
-Allyn Jackson
. 702

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

Inside the AMS
Eisenbud Presents
Testimony
On April 9, 2003, AMS president David Eisenbud presented
testimony in support of the fiscal year 2004 appropriations
for the National Science Foundation (NSF). The testimony
was given before the Subcommittee on Veterans' Affairs,
Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies
of the House Committee on Appropriations. The NSF falls
under the aegis ofthis subcommittee. What follows is the full
text of the testimony.

Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, I am
David Eisenbud, president of the American Mathematical
Society, representing more than 27,000 mathematical scientists in academia, industry, and the nationallaboratories. I am here today to testify on behalf of the National
Science Foundation (NSF).
Let me begin by expressing my thanks for the strong
commitment this committee has made to the NSF. I believe
that this support is very much in the public interest and
that your vision will pay extraordinary dividends in the
years to come. I am also grateful to the 107th Congress
for passing the NSF Authorization Act, which suggests an
FY 2004 budget of $6.39 billion for the NSF, as part of a
program of substantially increasing NSF support. This is
a direction we wholeheartedly support.
The NSF is crucial in maintaining the nation's scientific
leadership and in continuing our nation's fantastic technological progress. Dividends from past investments in the
NSF are manifest in the development of individual scientific disciplines and the development of interdisciplinary
research needed to meet today's and tomorrow's scientific
challenges. Research supported through the NSF has led
to profound advancement in science, mathematics, and engineering and has time and again underpinned new products, methods, technologies-even new industries.
Work the NSF supports in cellular biology has the
potential of shedding light on Alzheimer's disease, Lou
Gehrig's disease, and cancer. NSF support of computing
research may lead to collision warning, smart lane merging, and rear impact avoidance systems for automobiles.
An effort in engineering has led to a "pharmacy-on-a-chip"
implant that monitors a patient's blood chemistry and
will deliver accurate and timely doses of medicine.
Materials research has derived techniques for making
composite materials that can potentially be used for
constructing artificial bone and repairing nerve fibers.
Today, when national security and pressing needs are
of great concern to America, we should not forget that our
progress in these areas rests squarely on fundamental

JUNE/JULY 2003

research. For example, the cryptography that makes it
possible for banks to transact their business on the Internet
or for our military commanders to have secure communications in the field depends on fundamental advances in
number theory that just a few years ago were touted as the
sort of pure science that would never be applied. Future
progress in this seemingly abstract area, by us or by
hostile forces, could threaten the security of all these communications and would require fundamental new science
to repair the damage. If the past is any guide, the applications of science that we already see will be dwarfed in
importance by those of which we still have no idea. Thus,
it is critical to our nation that u.S. fundamental science and
mathematics remain at the highest level, and the NSF is the
leading agency promoting such fundamental research.
A strength of the NSF is that it supports the best research,
regardless ofits potential use, and good research often finds
its way into innovations. The NSF peer-review system has
an excellent track record of choosing the best science and
the best investigators to perform the research. The number
of Nobel Prize winners who were supported by the NSF is one
measure of this.
As a mathematician and as director of the NSF-supported
Mathematical Sciences Research Institute in Berkeley, California, I have intimate knowledge of how the health of the
NSF affects a discipline. Approximately 68 percent of federal
support for academic mathematics research comes from
the NSF. Continued advancement in the subfields of the
mathematical sciences depends critically on healthy NSF
budgets. Unfortunately, many grant proposals that are
deemed of very high quality are underfunded or not funded

AMS president David Eisenbud (right) testifying in
Washington, D.C., in support of FY 2004 appropriations
for the National Science Foundation. Subcommittee
members shown.are (left to right) Congressman
. Sanford D. Bishop Jr. (D-GA), (obscured person
unknown), Congressman Robert B. Aderholt (R-AL),
Congressman Michael K. Simpson (R-ID).

NOTICES OF THE AMS

703

Inside the AMS

at all. This funding situation has a very negative affect on
U.S. students when they consider mathematical research as
a career path. The pipeline issue, getting enough young
people into the discipline, is one of the main thrusts in the
use of new funding at the NSF and one on which we have a
long way to go. Adequate support also for midcareer scientists is a crucial part of this. Other science and engineering
fields experience many of the same tensions exhibited in
the mathematical sciences.
This state of affairs is serious, because the need for
mathematics in scientific discovery is accelerating. I have
already mentioned how theoretical advances in number
theory affect our most sensitive communications networks. Mathematical theory and modeling will contribute
to a better understanding of the spread of epidemics, of
DNA, of brain function, and of three-dimensional interactions of proteins-an enormous, complex problem of
biology. The understanding of uncertainty, of large data
sets and their uses, will need new mathematical theories.
The modeling, simulation, control, and manufacturing
of nano and quantum molecular devices will require
advances in mathematics.
The U.S. leads the world in science and in its many
technological applications; our economy and our culture
depend on this leadership. All disciplines of science and
engineering depend on a strong NSF.
Again, Mr. Chairman, thank you for your leadership
and thank you and the committee for your efforts on
behalf of the National Science Foundation. I encourage
you to continue your generous support of the NSF in your
FY 2004 appropriations.
-AMS Washington office

Epsilon Awards for 2003
The AMS Epsilon Fund for Young Scholars was established
in 1999 to provide financial assistance to summer programs
for mathematically talented high-school students in the
United States. For many years these programs have provided mathematically talented youngsters with their first
serious mathematical experiences. The name for the fund
was chosen in remembrance of the late Paul Erd6s, who
was fond of calling children "epsilons".
The AMS has chosen eight summer mathematics programs to receive Epsilon grants for activities in the summer
of 2003. The grants will support program expenses and
student scholarships and, in some cases, scholarships only.
The programs were chosen on the basis of mathematical
excellence and enthusiasm. The selection committee consisted of Lenore Cowen, Tufts University; Alan Edelman,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Joseph Gallian,
University of Minnesota, Duluth; and Joel Spencer, Courant
Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University
(chair). Award amounts were governed by the varying
financial needs of each program and totaled $80,000.
The programs receiving grants are: All Girls/All Math,
University of Nebraska; Canada/USA Mathcamp, Mathematics Foundation of America; Hampshire College Sum704

mer Studies in Mathematics, Amherst, Massachusetts;
PROMYS, Boston University; Ross Mathematics Program,
The Ohio State University; Stanford University Mathematics Camp, Stanford University; SWT Honors Summer Math
Camp, Southwest Texas State University; and University of
Chicago Young Scholars Program.
The grants for summer 2003 are paid for by the AMS
Epsilon Fund for Young Scholars (supplemented by the AMS
Program Development Fund). The AMS is continuing to
build the endowment for the Epsilon Fund, with a goal of
raising $ 2 million through individual donations and grants.
Once the Epsilon Fund endowment has reached the targeted
amount, the AMS intends to award a total of $100,000 in
Epsilon grants each year.
For further information about the Epsilon Fund for
Young Scholars, visit the website http: / jwww. ams. orgj
giving-to-ams/, or contact development@ams.org;
telephone 800-321-4267, extension 4111, or 401-455-4111.
Information about how to apply for Epsilon grants is
available at http://www.ams.org/careers-edu/
epsi 1on. html. A fairly comprehensive listing of summer
programs for mathematically talented high school students (including those with and without Epsilon grants)
is available at http://www.ams.org/careers-edu/
mathcamps. html.
-Elaine Kehoe

AMS Book Prize Established
At its meeting in January 2003, the AMS Council approved
the establishment of the AMS Book Prize. The prize will
recognize a single, relatively recent, outstanding research
book that makes a seminal contribution to the research
literature, reflects the highest standards of research
exposition, and promises to have a deep and long-term
impact in its area. The prize will be given once every three
years and will carry a cash award of $5,000.
Books may be nominated by members of the Society,
by members of the selection committee, by members of
AMS editorial committees, or by publishers. Current plans
call for the initial award to be made at the January 2005
Joint Mathematics Meetings. Nominations for the initial
award are due by April 1, 2004. Information about AMS
prizes may be found on the Web at http://www . ams .
orgjprizes-awards.
-Allyn Jackson

Michael Downes (1958-2003)
Michael John Downes, the principal author of the J\j\1S~TEX packages and an employee of the American Mathematical Society since 1985, passed away on March 8, 2003.
He had been diagnosed with an aggressive form of brain
cancer in December 2002.
Michael was born August 2, 1958; grew up in Lansing,
Michigan; and attended Michigan State University, graduating

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

Inside the AMS
from the university's honors program with a degree in Russian and a minor in mathematics. After graduation Michael
moved to Rhode Island, where he worked for
seventeen years as an editor and a publications technical
specialist.
Members of the AMS may have seen Michael at several
annual meetings, where he presented sessions for AMS
authors in the use of .JtMS-~TEX; he also wrote an article
on this topic for the Notices ("TEX and I1-T£X 2e", December
2002, pp. 1384-91). He was a member of the ~TEX team,
helping to plan its future direction; this involvement led
to the acceptance of .JtMS-~TEX as a "required" component
of ~TEX.
Michael was active in his church and community, and
looked for opportunities to help others. He leaves three
daughters, his former wife, his mother, four brothers,
three sisters, and many nieces, nephews, aunts, uncles, and
cousins. He will be greatly missed.

-Barbara Beeton, AMS

Deaths of AMS Members
ERIK SPARREANDERSEN, of Hellerup, Denmark, died on March 8,
2003. He was a member of the Society for 49 years.
ROBERT P. EDDY, of Colorado Springs, CO, died on July 14,
2002. Born on November 19,1919, he was a member of the
Society for 60 years.
BERTRAM J. EISENSTADT, professor emeritus, Wayne State
University, died on February 16,2003. Born on March 28,
1923, he was a member of the Society for 55 years.
DIETER GAIER, Justus-Liebig University, Giessen, Germany,
died on December 15, 2002. He was a member of the
Society for 48 years.
EUZABETH S. HIRSCHFELDER, of Mt. Horeb, WI, died on September 29, 2002. She was a member of the Society for 75
years.
LEE KATZ, of Commack, NY, died on October 22, 2002.
Born on January 29, 1936, he was a member of the Society for 13 years.
SEMEN YAKOVLEVICH KHAVINSON, professor, Moscow State
Civil Engineering University, Russia, died on January 30,
2003. Born on May 17, 1927, he was a member of the Society for 9 years.
HOWARD LEVI, professor emeritus, Herbert H. Lehman
College, CUNY, died on September 11, 2002. Born on
November 9, 1916, he was a member of the Society for
64 years.
GORDON MAcDONALD, of Cambridge, MA, died on May 14,
2002. He was a member of the Society for 31 years.
GEORGE P. MCCREVAN JR., of Randolph, MA, died on August 17, 2002. He was a member of the Society for 9 years.
WERNER M. MEYER-KOENIG, professor emeritus, University
of Stuttgart, Germany, died on December 26, 2002. Born
on May 26, 1912, he was a member of the Society for 45
years.

JUNE/JULY 2003

PROFESSOR!ASSOCIATE
PROFESSOR!
SENIOR LECTURER!LECTURER
DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS AND APPLIED MATHEMATICS

The Department is a large and dynamic organisation
with an establishment of over thirty faculty members.
We seek to make four new appointments.
Applications are sought for posts at all levels, from
lecturer to Professor, in all fields of interest to the
Department (see our website at www.mth.uct.ac.za for
details of research groups). We particularly encourage
applications from candidates with research and teaching
interests in one or more of Algebra, Algebraic Geometry,
Algebraic Topology, Computational/Numerical
Mathematics, Cosmology and General Relativity theory,
Fluid and Solid Mechanics, Formal Aspects of Computing,
Industrial Mathematics (Partial Differential Equations
and Applications). Applications are also welcomed from
candidates whose activities include the application of one
or more of these disciplines in physics and/or engineering.
Applicants for senior positions should have good teaching and strong international research records, and the
ability to raise research funding and develop strong
research programmes in their fields of interest.
Candidates should indicate for which level of position
they are applying. Level of appointment will be
commensurate with experience and standing of
applicants.
The remuneration packages are negotiable and include
highly competitive benefits.
Please send a letter of application plus your CV
(including the names, postal/email addresses,
telephone/fax numbers of 3 referees) to: The Staff
Recruitment Office (Ref: 727), UCT, Rondebosch 7701,
Cape Town, South Africa. Review of applications will
begin on 15 July 2003 and will continue until the
positions are filled. For further information, telephone:
+27 21 650-2220, fax: +27 21 650-2138,
email: mavundlm@bremner.uct.ac.za
Website: http://www.uct.ac.za
The University is fully committed to employment equity
(http://web.uct.ac.za/mic/emequity/eep.htm) and
particularly welcomes applications from suitably
qualified black South Africans, women and persons with
disabilities.

NOTICES OF THE AMS

C\l
0>

~
,.....
co

LO

co

0>

o

705

Reference and Book List

The Reference section of the Notices
is intended to provide the reader with
frequently sought information in
an easily accessible manner. New
information is printed as it becomes
available and is referenced after the
first printing. As soon as information
is updated or otherwise changed, it
will be noted in this section.

Contacting the Notices
The preferred method for contacting
the Notices is electronic mail. The
editor is the person to whom to send
articles and letters for consideration.
Articles include feature articles,
memorial articles, communications,
opinion pieces, and book reviews. The
editor is also the person to whom to
send news of unusual interest about
other people's mathematics research.
The managing editor is the person
to whom to send items for "Mathematics People", "Mathematics Opportunities", "For Your Information",
"Reference and Book List", and "Mathematics Calendar". Requests for
permissions, as well as all other
inquiries, go to the managing editor.
The electronic-mail addresses are
notices@math.tamu.eduinthecase
of the editor and noti ces@ams .0 rg
in the case of the managing editor.
The fax numbers are 979-845-6028
for the editor and 401-331-3842 for
the managing editor. Postal addresses
may be found in the masthead.
706

Information for Notices Authors
The Notices welcomes unsolicited articles for consideration for publication, as well as proposals for such articles. The following provides general
guidelines for writing Notices articles
and preparing them for submission.
Notices readership. The Notices
goes to about 30,000 subscribers
worldwide, of whom about 20,000 are
in North America. Approximately
8,000 of the 20,000 in North America
are graduate students who have com-

NOTICES OF THE AMS

pleted at least one year of graduate
school. All readers may be assumed
to be interested in mathematics research, but they are not all active researchers.
Notices feature articles. Feature
articles may address mathematics,
mathematical news and developments, mathematics history, issues
affecting the profession, mathematics
education at any level, the AMS and
its activities, and other such topics of
interest to Notices readers. Each

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

Reference and Book List
article is expected to have a large target audience of readers, perhaps
5,000 of the 30,000 subscribers. Authors must therefore write their articles for nonexperts rather than for
experts or would-be experts. In particular, the mathematics articles in
the Notices are expository. The language of the Notices is English.
Most feature articles, including
those on mathematics, are expected
to be of long-term value and should
be written as such. Ideally each article should put its topic in a context,
providing some history and other orientation for the reader and, as necessary, relating the subject matter to
things that readers are likely to understand. In most cases, articles
should progress to dealing with contemporary matters, not giving only
historical material. The articles that
are received the best by readers tend
to relate different areas of mathematics to each other.
By design the Notices is partly magazine and partly journal, and authors'
expository styles should take this into
account. For example, many readers
want to understand the mathematics
articles without undue effbrt and
without consulting other sources.
Mathematics. feature articles in the
Notices are normally six to nine pages,
sometimes a little longer. Shorter articles are more likely to be read fully
than are longer articles. The first page
is 400 or 500 words, and subsequent
pages are about 800 words. From this
one should subtract an allowance for
figures, photos, and other illustrations, and an appropriate allowance
for any displayed equations and any
bibliography.
Form of articles. Except with very
short articles, authors are encouraged
to use section headings and subsection headings to help orient readers.
Normally there is no section heading
at the beginning of an article. Despite
the encouraged use of internal headings, the assigning of numbers to sec~ions and subsections is not permitted in any article.
The bibliography should be kept
short. In the case of mathematics articles, bibliographies are normally limited to about ten items and should
consist primarily of entries like books
JUNE/JULY 2003

in which one may do further reading.
To help readers who might want lists
of recent literature, an author might
include a small number of recent publications with good bibliographies.
Editing process. Most articles that
are destined to be accepted undergo
an intensive editing process. The purposes of this process are to ensure
that the target audience is as large as
practicable, that the content of the
article is clear and unambiguous, and
that the article is relatively easy to
read. Usually it is the members of the
editorial board who are involved in
this process. Sometimes outside referees are consulted.
Preparation of articles for submission. The preferred form for submitted articles is as electronic files.
Authors who cannot send articles electronically may send the articles by
fax or by postal mail.
Articles with a significant number
of mathematical symbols are best
prepared in T£X, 01'£X, or Aj\1S-T£X.
There are no special style files for the
Notices, because TEX code gets converted to something else during the
production process. Since the Notices
is set in narrow columns, keeping displayed formulas relatively short helps
to minimize adjustments during the
production process; avoiding nonstandard supplementary files and
complex sequences of T£X definitions
also helps. For the handling of figures and other illustrations, please
consult the editor.
Articles without a significant number of mathematical symbols may be
prepared as text files or in Microsoft
Word. In the case of files prepared in
Microsoft Word, it is advisable to send
both the file and a fax of a printout.

Instructions for Authors of
"WHAT IS... ?" Columns
The purpose of the "WHAT IS ...?" column is to provide brief, nontechnical
descriptions of mathematical objects
in use in current research. The target
audience for the columns is first-year
graduate students.
Each "WHAT IS ... ?" column provides an expository description of a
single mathematical object being used
in contemporary research. Thus
"WHAT IS M-Theory?" would be too
NOTICES OF THE AMS

broad, but "WHAT IS a Brane?" would
be appropriate; ideally, "WHAT IS a
Brane?" would give a flavor of what
M-theory is.
The writing should be nontechnical and informal. The level should be
a little higher than the level of popular articles about mathematical developments that one finds in such
magazines as Science.
There is a strict limit of two Notices
pages (1,400 words with no picture,
or 1,200 words with one picture). A
list of "Further Reading" should contain no more than three references.
Inquiries and comments about the
"WHAT IS ... ?" column are welcome
and may be sent to noti ces-whati s@
ams.org.

Upcoming Deadlines
June 30, 2003: Nominations for
the Fermat Prize for Mathematics Research. See http://www . ups-tl se.
fr/ACTUALITES/Sciences/Prix_Fe
rmat_2003/Areglement.html.
June 30, 2003: Nominations for
the National Medal of Science. See
"Mathematics Opportunities" in this
issue.
July 15, 2003: Applications for
Women's International Science Collaboration (WISC) Program. See http : / /
www.aaas.org/international/
wi s cnew . 5 htm 1, or contactWISC Travel
Grant, American Association for the
Advancement of Science, Directorate
for International Programs, 1200 New
York Avenue, NW, Washington, DC
20005.
July 24, 2003: Proposals for NSF
CAREER Program.. See "Mathematics
Opportunities" in this issue.
July 28, 2003: Proposals for VIGRE
grants. See http://www.nsf.gov/
pubs/2002/nsf02120/nsf02120.
txt.
August 1, 2003: Applications for
2004-2005 Fulbright traditional lecturing and research grants. See "Mathematics Opportunities" in this issue.
August 15, 2003: Applications for
National Research Council Research
Associateship Program. See http : / /
www4.nat~onalacademies.org/

pga/ rap. nsf, or contact the National
Research Council, Associateship Programs (TJ 2114), 2101 Constitution
Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20418;

707

Reference and Book List
telephone 202-334-2760; fax 202-3342759; email: rap@nas. edu.
September 15,2003: Nominations
for Sloan Research Fellowships. See
"Mathematics Opportunities" in this
issue.
October 1, 2003: Nominations for
AWM Hay Award and Schafer Prize.
See "Mathematics Opportunities" in
this issue.
October 15,2003: Applications for
spring semester of Math in Moscow
and for AMS scholarships. See http: I I
www.mccme.ru/mathinmoscow.or
contact Math in Moscow, P.O. Box
524, Wynnewood, PA 19096; fax
+7095-291-65-01; email: mi m@mccme.
ru. For information about and application forms for the AMS scholarships,
seehttp://www.ams.org/careersedu/mi moscow. html ,orcontactMath
in Moscow Program, Membership and
Programs Department, AmericanMathematical Society, 201 Charles Street,
Providence, RI 02904; email:
prof-serv@ams.org.
October 17, 2003: Applications for
NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowships. See http://www . fastl ane.
nsf.gov/dl1/D11Menu.htm.
November 1, 2003: Applications
for 2004-2005 Fulbright spring/summer seminars in Germany, Korea, and
Japan and for summer German Studies Seminar. See "Mathematics Opportunities" in this issue.
December 31, 2003: Entries for
Cryptologia paper competitions. See
http://www.dean.usma.edu/math/
pubs/cryptol ogi ai, or contact
Cryptologia, Department of Mathematical Sciences, United States Military Academy, West Point, NY 10996;
email: Crypto1ogi a@usma. edu.
January 2, 2004: Applications for
Fields Institute postdoctoral fellowships. See "Mathematics Opportunities" in this issue.

New Journals for 2002
Below is a list of mathematical journals appearing for the first time in
2002, as compiled by Mathematical
Reviews. This list, as well as the listings for new journals for other years,
can be found on the Web at http: I I
www.ams.org/mathweb/
mi-newjs.html.
708

African Diaspora Journal of Mathematics, ISSN: 1539-B54X, announced
for late 2002.
International Journal of Computational and Numerical Analysis and
Applications, 1311-6789, Academic
Publications, $120/4 issues/yr.
International Mathematical Journal, 1311-6797, International Scientific Publications, Chiba, price not
listed, frequency unknown.
Journal of Algebra and Its Applications, 0219-4988, World Scientific,
$240/4 issues/yr., announced.
Journal ofSymplectic Geometry, International Press, announced.

Book List
The Book List highlights books that
have mathematical themes and are
aimed at a broad audience potentially
including mathematicians, students,
and the general public. When a book
has been reviewed in the Notices, a
reference is given to the review. Generally the list will contain only books
published within the last two years,
though exceptions may be made in
cases where current events (e.g., the
death ofa prominent mathematician,
coverage of a certain piece of mathematics in the news) warrant drawing
readers' attention to older books. Suggestions for books to include on the list
may be sent to noti ces-bookl i st@
ams.org.
"~Added to "Book List" since the
list's last appearance.
1089 and All That: A Journey into
Mathematics, by David Acheson. Oxford University Press, July 2002. ISBN
0-19-851623-1.
,'~ Abel's Proof: An Essay on the
Sources and Meaning ofMathematical
Unsolvability, by Peter Pesic. MIT Press,
May 2003. ISBN 0-262-16216-4.
,'~ All the Mathematics You Missed
(But Need to Know for Graduate
School), by Thomas A. Garrity. Cambridge University Press, December
2001. ISBN 0-521-79707-1.
The Annotated Flatland: A Romance
ofMany Dimensions, Edwin A. Abbott;
introduction and notes by Ian Stewart.
Perseus Publishing, November 2001.
ISBN 0-7382-0541-9. (R'eviewed November 2002.)
NOTICES OF THE AMS

The Art ofthe Infinite: The Pleasures
of Mathematics, by Robert Kaplan
and Ellen Kaplan. Oxford University
Press, March 2003. ISBN 0-19514743-X.
Behind Deep Blue: Building the
Computer That Defeated the World
Chess Champion, by Feng-hsiung Hsu.
Princeton University Press, November
2002. ISBN 0-691-09065-3.
-k Beyond the Limit: The Dream of
Sofya Kovalevskaya, by Joan Spicci.
Forge, August 2002. ISBN 0-76530233-0.
The Bit and the Pendulum: How the
New Physics ofInformation Is Revolutionizing Science, by Tom Siegfried.
John Wiley & Sons, February 2000.
ISBN 0-47132-174-5. (Reviewed August
2002.)
Codebreakers: Arne Beurling and
the Swedish Crypto Program during
World War II, by Bengt Beckman.
Translated by Kjell-Ove Widman. AMS,
February 2003. ISBN 0-8218-2889-4.
The Colossal Book ofMathematics:
Classic Puzzles, Paradoxes, and Problems, by Martin Gardner. W. W.
Norton & Company, August 2001.
ISBN 0-393-02023-1. (Reviewed October 2002.)
Conned Again, Watson! Cautionary
Tales of Logic, Math, and Probability,
by Colin Bruce. Perseus Publishing,
January 2001. ISBN 0-7382-0345-9.
(Reviewed November 2002.)
The Constants of Nature: From
Alpha to Omega-The Numbers That
Encode the Deepest Secrets of the Uni- _
verse, by John D. Barrow. Jonathan
Cape, September 2002. Pantheon
Books, January 2003. ISBN 0-37542221-8.
Correspondance GrothendieckSerre, Pierre Colmez and Jean-Pierre
Serre, editors. Societe Mathematique ,
de France, 2001. ISBN 2-85629-104-X.
Damned Lies and Statistics: Untangling Numbers from the Media,
Politicians, and Activists, by Joel
Best. University of California Press,
May 2001. ISBN 0-520-21978-3.
(Reviewed February 2003.)
Does God Play Dice? The New Mathematics of Chaos, by Ian Stewart.
Blackwell, revised second edition,
January 2002. ISBN 0-631-23251-6.
(Reviewed December 2002.)
VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

Reference and Book List
~k Doing Mathematics: Convention,
Subject, Calculation, Analogy, by Martin H. Krieger. World Scientific, April
2003. ISBN 9-812-38200-3.
Emergence of the Theory of Lie
Groups. An Essay in the History of
Mathematics, 1869-1926, by Thomas
Hawkins. Springer-Verlag, 2000. ISBN
0-387-98963-3. (Reviewed in this
issue.)
Entanglement: The Greatest Mystery in Physics, by Amir D. Aczel. Four
Walls Eight Windows, October 2002.
ISBN 1-56858-232-3.
Four Colors Suffice: How the Map
Problem Was Solved, by Robin Wilson.
Princeton University Press, March
2003. ISBN 0-691-11533-8.
The Fractal Murders., by Mark
Cohen. Muddy Gap Press, May 2002.
0-9718986-0-X.
Fragments of Infinity: A Kaleidoscope of Math and Art, by Ivars
Peterson. John Wiley & Sons, October
2001. ISBN 0-471-16558-1. (Reviewed
October 2002.)
-/, Gamma: Exploring Euler's Constant, by Julian Havil. Princeton
University Press, May 2003. ISBN 0691-09983-9.
Geometry: Our Cultural History, by
Audun Holme. Springer, April 2002.
ISBN 3-540-41949-7.
The Glass Wall: Why Mathematics
Can Seem Difficult, by Frank Smith.
Teachers College Press, July 2002.
ISBN 0-807-74241-4 (paperback),
0-807-74242-2 (cloth).
God in the Equation: How Einstein
Became the Prophet of the New Religious Era, by Corey S. Powell. Free
Press, August 2002. ISBN 0-68486348-0.
GodeI's Proof, by Ernest Nagel and
James R. Newman. New York University Press, revised edition, February
2002. ISBN 0-8147-5816-9.
The Golden Ratio: The Story ofPhi,
the World's Most Astonishing Number,
by Mario Livio. Broadway Books,
October 2002. ISBN 0-767-90815-5.
The Hilbert Challenge, by Jeremy J.
Gray. Oxford University Press, December 2000. ISBN 0-198-50651-1.
(Reviewed September 2002.)
Hinged Dissections: Swinging and
Twisting, by Greg N. Frederickson.
Cambridge University Press, September 2002. ISBN 0-521-81192-9.
iI,

JUNE/JULY 2003

The Honors Class, by Benjamin
Yandell. A K Peters, December 2001.
ISBN 1-568-81141-1. (Reviewed September 2002.)
How the Other Half Thinks: Adventures in Mathematical Reasoning,
by Sherman Stein. McGraw-Hill, July
2001. ISBN 0-071-37339-X. (Reviewed
September 2002.)
How the Universe Got Its Spots, by
Janna Levin. Princeton University Press,
April 2002. ISBN 0-691-09657-0.
Imagining Numbers (Particularly
the Square Root of Minus Fifteen), by
Barry Mazur. Farrar, Straus and
Giroux, February 2003. ISBN 0-37417469-5.
In Code: A Mathematical journey,
by Sarah Flannery and David Flannery.
Workman Publishing, May 2001. ISBN
0-761-12384-9. (Reviewed April 2003.)
Indra's Pearls: The Vision of Felix
Klein, by David Mumford, Caroline
Series, and David J. Wright. Cambridge
University Press, January 2002. ISBN
0-521-35253-3. (Reviewed January
2003.)
It Must Be Beautiful: Great Equations
of Modern Science, Graham Farmelo,
editor. Granta Books, February 2002.
ISBN 1-862-0 7479-8. (Reviewed March
2003.)
i', janos Bolyai, Euclid, and the Nature of Space, by Jeremy J. Gray. MIT
Press, May 2003. ISBN 0-262-57174-9.
Linked: The New Science of Networks, by Albert-Lasl6 Barabasi.
Perseus Publishing, May 2002. ISBN
0-738-20667-9.
Mathematical Apocrypha: Stories
and Anecdotes ofMathematicians and
the Mathematical, by Steven G. Krantz.
Mathematical Association of America, July 2002. ISBN 0-883-85539-9.
Mathematical Reflections, by Peter
Hilton, Derek Holton, and Jean
Pedersen. Springer, December 1996.
ISBN 0-387-94770-1. (Reviewed February 2003.)
Mathematical Vistas, by Peter
Hilton, Derek Holton, and Jean
Pedersen. Springer-Verlag, January
2002. ISBN 0-387-95064-8. (Reviewed
February 2003.)
A Mathematician Grappling with
His Century: The Autobiography of
Laurent Schwartz. Translated from
the French by L. Schneps. Birkhauser,
2001. ISBN 3-7643-6052-6.
NOTICES OF THE AMS

i', Mathematics: A Very Short Introduction, by Timothy Gowers. Oxford
University Press, October 2002. ISBN
0-192-85361-9.
Mathematics and the Roots ofPostmodern Thought, by Vladimir Tasic.
Oxford University Press, 2001. ISBN
0-195-13967-4.
Mathematics Elsewhere: An Exploration of Ideas across Cultures, by
Marcia Ascher. Princeton University
Press, September 2002. ISBN 0-69107020-2. (Reviewed May 2003.)
Mathematics Galore: Masterclasses,
Workshops, and Team Projects in
Mathematics and Its Applications, by
C. J. Budd and C. J. Sangwin. Oxford
University Press, June 2001. ISBN
0-198-50769-0 (hardcover), 0-19850770-4 (paperback). (Reviewed
September 2002.)
i', The Mathematics of juggling, by
Burkard Polster. Springer, November
2002. ISBN 0-387-95513-5.
The Mathematics of Oz: Mental
Gymnastics from beyond the Edge,
by Clifford Pickover. Cambridge University Press, October 2002. ISBN
0-521-01678-9.
M. C. Escher's Legacy: A Centennial Celebration, edited by Doris
Schattschneider and Michele Emmer.
Springer, January 2003. ISBN 3-54042458-X. (Reviewed April 2003.)
The Millennium Problems: The
Seven Greatest Unsolved Mathematical Puzzles of Our Time, by Keith J.
Devlin. Basic Books, October 2002.
ISBN 0-465-01729-0.
More Mathematical Astronomy
Morsels, by Jean Meeus. Willmann-Bell
Inc., 2002. ISBN 0-943396-743.
The Music of the Primes: Searching
to Solve the Greatest Mystery in Mathematics, by Marcus Du Sautoy.
HarperCollins, April 2003. ISBN 0-06621070-4.
A New Kind of Science, by Stephen
Wolfram. Wolfram Media, Inc., May
2002. ISBN 1-579-55008-8. (Reviewed
February 2003.)
Nexus: Small Worlds and the Groundbreaking Science ofNetworks, by Mark
Buchanan. W. W. Norton & Company,
May 2002. ISBN 0-393-04153-0.
Niels Hendrik Abel and His Times:
Called Too Soon by Flames Afar, by Arild
Stubhaug; translated by R. Daly.

709

Reference and Book List

Announcing the solution to the
problem ofthe unification ofquantum
theory and relativity theory which puzzled
Albert Einstein all his life.
A new and seminal book.

Springer, May 2000. ISBN 3-54066834-9. (Reviewed August 2002.)
'k Origami3, edited by Thomas
Hull. A K Peters, July 2002. ISBN 156881-181-0.

"GRAND UNIFIED THEOREM:
A REPRESENTATION OF THE
UNIFIED FIELD THEORY
OR THE
THEORY OF EVERYTHING"

John Derbyshire. Joseph Henry Press,
March 2003. ISBN 0-309-08549-7.

by G.A. Oyibo·
Hardcover: ISBN: 1-59033-134-6 $89.00
Softcover: ISBN: 1-59033-259-8 $19.50
published by

NOVA SCIENCE PUBLISHERS, INC.
400 Oser Avenue, Suite 1600
Hauppauge, NY 11788-3619
Tel: (631) 231-7269 Fax: (631) 231-8175
Email: novascience@earthlink.net
www.novapublishers.com

Prime Obsession: Bernhard Riemann
and the Greatest Unsolved Problem, by

The Rainbow Bridge: Rainbows in
Art, Myth, and Science, by Raymond L.

Lee Jr. and Alistair B. Fraser. Pennsylvania State University Press and
SPIE Press, 2001. ISBN 0-271-01977-8.
(Reviewed December 2002.)
Remarkable Mathematicians, by
loan James. Cambridge University
Press, February 2003. ,ISBN 0-52152094-0.
The Riemann Hypothesis: The
Greatest Unsolved Problem in Mathematics, by Karl Sabbagh. Farrar, Straus

and Giroux, April 2003. ISBN 0-37425007-3 ..
Six Degrees: The Science of a Connected Age, by Duncan J. Watts. W. W.
Norton & Company, February 2003.

ISBN 0-393-04142-5.
Spaceland, by Rudy Rucker. Tor
Books, June 2002. ISBN 0-765-30366-3.
'k Sync: The Emerging Science of
Spontaneous Order, by Steven Strogatz.

GRANT FUNDING AVAILABLE

The Calculus Consortium for Higher Education
(CCHE) is a small non-profit public charity the
mission of which is to improve the teaching of
mathematics in secondary schools, two-year
colleges, colleges and universities. It supports
workshops, meetings, conferences or research
projects in innovative coursework. With that goal
in mind grant requests are hereby being solicited
in those four areas. Grants are usually for 1 year
and for less than $25,000. Proposals should 5
pages or less in length and be accompanied by a
budget using NSF Form 1030. They should be
sent to CCHE, P.o. Box 22333, Carmel, CA 93922
or Email: cche@redshi ft .com, Fax: (831) 6247571 by November 15th for consideration by the
Board of Directors in early January. Requests for
an earlier review date will be considered on an individual basis. If there are any questions, please
contact Thomas Tucker, Mathematics Department,
Colgate University, Hamilton, NY 13346, Email
(preferred): ttucke r @mai 1 . co1gate. edu.

710

NOTICES OF THE AMS

Hyperion, February 2003. ISBN 0-78686844-9.
Wavelets through a Looking Glass:
The World ofthe Spectrum, by ala Brat-

teli and Palle Jorgensen. Birkhauser/
Springer, 2002. ISBN 0-8176-4280-3.
What Are the Odds? The Chances of
Extraordinary Events in Everyday Life,

by JeffersonHane Weaver. Prometheus
Books, February 2002. ISBN 1-57392933-6.
What Shape Is a Snowflake?, by
Ian Stewart. W. H. Freeman & Co.,
November 2001. ISBN 0-716-74794-4.
(Reviewed December 2002.)
The Zen of Magic Squares, Circles,
and Stars: An Exhibition ofSurprising
Structures across Dimensions, by

Clifford A. Pickover. Princeton
University Press, January 2001. ISBN
0-691-07041-5. (Reviewed March
2003.)

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

I

Il

1

.1. ;·."

t··~

, ..f , "

j•.

<

.::::

~~

·
.
1
.
'·
.
··

.;

: i
t

:'.~:'

.,', ,,-

t

I

·~.l

.<0

:~

Mathematical Word Processing • Ib-TEX Typesetting • Computer Algebra

The Gold Standard for
Mathematical Publishing
Scientific WorkPlace and Scientific Word
make writing, publishing, and doing
mathematics easier than you ever imagined
possible. You compose and edit your
documents directly on the screen without
being forced to think in a programming
language. A click of a button allows you to
typeset your documents in I5\TEX. And,
with Scientific WorkPlace, you can compute
and plot solutions with the integrated
computer algebra system.

Scientific Notebook
is the favorite for student labs!
Exam Builder is included.

cKichan

SOFTWARE, INC.

---

"Tools for Scientific Creativity since 1981

Add this Cover Sheet
to all of your
Academic Job Applications
How to use this form
1. Using the facing page
or a photocopy,
(or visit the AMS web site
for a choice of electronic
versions at www. ams .0 rgj
coversheetj), fill in the
answers which apply to all
of your academic
applications.
Make photocopies.
2. As you mail each
application, fill in the
remaining questions
neatly on one cover
sheet and include it
on top of your application materials.

The purpose of the cover
form is to aid department
staff in tracking and
responcling to each application for employment.
Mathematics departments
in Bachelor's-, Master's-,
and Doctorate-granting
institutions are expecting
to receive the form from
each applicant, along with
the other application materials they require.

The AMS suggests that
applicants and employers
visit the Job Application
Database for
Mathematicians
(www.mathjobs.org), a

employers. Also, reference
writers can submit their
letters online. A paperless
application process is
possible with this system,
however; employers can
choose to use any portion
of the service. There will
be annual employer fees
beginning this year. This
system was developed at
the Duke University
Department of
Mathematics.

new electronic resource
being offered by the AMS
(in partnership with Duke
University) for the second
year in 2002-03. The
system provides' a way for
applicants to produce
printed coversheet forms,
apply for jobs, or publicize
Please direct all questions
themselves in the "Job
Wanted" list. Employers
and comments to: empcan post a job listing, and i nfo@ams. org.
once applications are
made, search and sort
among· their applicants.
Note-taking, rating, e-mail,
data downloacling and
customizable EOE funnctions are available to

Academic Employment in Mathematics

AMS STANDARD COVER SHEET
Last Name
First Name
Middle Names
Address through next June

_

Home Phone

e-mail Address

Current Institutional Affiliation

Work Phone

Highest Degree Held or Expected

This form is provided
courtesy of the
American
Mathematical Society.
This cover sheet
is provided as an aid
to departments
in processing
job applications.
It should be included
with your application
material.

Granting Institution _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Date (optional)

_

Ph.D. Advisor
Ph.D. Thesis Title (optional)

_

Indicate the mathematical subject area(s) in which you have done research using the Mathematics Subject
Classification printed on the back of this form or on the AMS website. Use the two-digit classification which
best fits your interests in the Primary Interest line and additional two-digit numbers in the Secondary Interest
line.

Primary Interest ~
Secondary Interests optional ~

~

Give a brief synopsis of your current research interests (e.g. finite group actions on four-manifolds).
Avoid special mathematical symbols and please do not write outside of the boxed area.

Please print or type.
Do not send this form
to the AMS.
Most recent, if any, position held post Ph.D.

University or Company
Position Title
Indicate the position for which you are applying and position posting code, if applicable

If unsuccessful for this position, would you like to be considered for a temporary position?
DYes

o No

If yes, please check the appropriate boxes.
D Postdoctoral Position D 2+ Year Position D 1 Year Position

List the names, affiliations, and e-mail addresses of up to four individuals who will prOVide letters of recommendation if asked. Mark the box provided for each individual whom you have already asked to send a letter.

D

_

D

_

0

_

D

_

2000
Mathematics
Subject
elassification
00
01
03
05
06
08
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
22
26
28
30
31
32
33
34
35
37
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
49

General
History and biography
Mathematical logic and foundations
Combinatorics
Order, lattices, ordered algebraic structures
General algebraic systems
Number theory
Field theory and polynomials
Commutative rings and algebras
Algebraic geometry
Linear and multilinear algebra, matrix theory
Associative rings and algebras
Nonassociative rings and algebras
Category theory, homological algebra
K-theory
Group theory and generalizations
Topological groups, Lie groups
Real functions
Measure and integration
Functions of a complex variable
Potential theory
Several complex variables and analytic spaces
Special functions
Ordinary differential equations
Partial differential equations
Dynamical systems and ergodic theory
Difference and functional equations
Sequences, series, summability
Approximations and expansions
Fourier analysis
Abstract harmonic analysis
Integral transforms, operational calculus
Integral equations
Functional analysis
Operator theory
Calculus of variations and optimal control,
optimization

51
52
53
54
55

57
58
60
62
65
68
70
74
76
78
80
81
82
83
85
86
90
91
92
93
94
97

Geometry
Convex and discrete geometry
Differential geometry
General topology
Algebraic topology
Manifolds and cell complexes
Global analysis, analysis on manifolds
Probability theory and stochastic processes
Statistics
Numerical analysis
Computer science
Mechanics of particles and systems
Mechanics of deformable solids
Fluid mechanics
Optics, electromagnetic theory
Classical thermodynamics, heat transfer
Quantum theory
Statistical mechanics, structure of matter
Relativity and gravitational theory
Astronomy and astrophysics
Geophysics
Operations research, mathematical programming
Game theory, economics, social and behavioral
sciences
Biology and other natural sciences
Systems theory, control
Information and communication, circuits
Mathematics education

Mathematics Calendar
The most comprehensive and up-to-date Mathematics Calendar
information is available on e-MATH at
http://www.ams.org/mathcal/.

June 2003
1-4 2003 ASL Annual Meeting, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois. (Sept. 2002, p. 1000)

1-6 International Conference on Group Theory: Combinatorial,
Geometric, and Dynamical Aspects of Infinite Groups, Gaeta,
Italy. (Sept. 2002, p. 1000)
1-7 Spring School in Analysis: Function Spaces and Applications,
Paseky nad Jizerou, Czech Republic. (Mar. 2003, p. 399)
1-30 (POSTPONED TILL FURTHER NOTICE) Statistical Methods in
Microarray Analysis, Institute for Mathematical Sciences, National
University of Singapore, Singapore. (Mar. 2003, p. 399)
-:~ 2 Bjorn

Dahlberg Seminar, Mathematical Center, Chalmers Uni-

versity of Technology/Goteborg University, Goteborg, Sweden.
Program: C. Kenig, Univ. of Chicago: Free boundary regularity
results for harmonic measure and Poisson kernels.
Organizer: Bjorn Dahlberg Fund.
Contacts: V. Adolfsson, vilhelm@math. chalmers. se.
Information: http://www.math.chalmers.se/Math/Research/
HarmonicAnalysis/dahlbergfonden/index-eng.html.
2-4 International Workshop on Computer Algebra Systems
and Their Applications, CASA'2003, Saint Petersburg, Russian
Federation. (Jan. 2003, p. 81)
2-4 Technical Session on Computer Graphics, TSCG'2003, Saint
Petersburg, Russian Federation. (Jan. 2003, p. 81)
2-6 Conference on Representation Theory for Algebraic Groups,
University of Aarhus, Aarhus, Denmark. (Mar. 2003, p. 400)

This section contains announcements of meetings and conferences

of interest to some segment of the mathematical public, including ad
hoc, local, or regional meetings, and meetings and symposia devoted
to specialized topics, as well as announcements of regularly scheduled
meetings of national or international mathematical organizations. A
complete list of meetings of the Society can be found on the last page of
each issue.
An announcement will be published in the Notices if it contains a call
for papers and specifies the place, date, subject (when applicable), and
the speakers; -a second announcement will be published only if there
are changes or necessary additional information. Once an announcement
has appeared, the event will be briefly noted in every third issue until
it has been held and a reference will be given in parentheses to the
month, year, and page of the issue in which the complete information
appeared. Asterisks (;'~) mark those announcements containing new or
revised information.
In general, announcements of meetings and conferences held in North
America carry only the date, title of meeting, place of meeting, names of
speakers (or sometimes a general statement on the program), deadlines
for abstracts or contributed papers, and source of further information.
Meetings held outside the North American area may carry more detailed
information. In any case, if there is any application deadline with

JUNE/JULY 2003

2-6 Complex Analysis and Geometry-XVI, Grand Hotel Bellavistain Levico Terme, Trento, Italy. (Apr. 2003, p. 495)
2-6 DIMACS Workshop on Complexity and Inference, DIMACS
Center, Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey. (May 2003,
p.601)
2-6 Symplectic Geometry and Physics: Workshop III: Symplectic
Geometry and String Theory, Institute for Pure and Applied

Mathematics, UCLA, Los Angeles, California. (Oct. 2002, p. 1135)
-:~ 2-27 Clay Mathematics Institute Summer School on Harmonic

Analysis, the Trace Formula and Shimura Varieties, The Fields

Institute, Toronto, Ontario.
Organizing Committee: ]. Arthur (Toronto), D. Ellwood (Boston

and CMI), R. Kottwitz (Chicago).
Information:
http://www.fields.utoronto.ca/programs/
scientific/02-03/automorphic_forms/CMI_summer_school/.
5-8 Call for Papers: Hawaii International Conference on Statistics
and Related Fields, Sheraton Waikiki Hotel, Honolulu, Hawaii.
(Jan. 2003, p. 81)

5-1 2 Fifth International Conference on Geometry, Integrability
and Quantization, Sts. Constantine and Elena resort (near Varna),
Bulgaria. (Apr. 2003, p. 495)
-:~ 7-10 Trends in Partial Differential Equations of Mathematical

Physics, Obidos, Portugal.
Description: The international conference on trends in partial

differential equations of mathematical physics will be held on the
occasion of the 70th birthday of V. A. Solonnikov.
Invited Speakers: H. Amann (Univ. Zurich, Switzerland); L. Caffarelli (Univ. Texas, Austin, USA); E. DiBenedetto (Vanderbilt Univ.,
respect to participation in the' meeting, this fact should be noted.
All communications on meetings and conferences in the mathematical
sciences should be sent to the Editor of the Notices in care of the American
Mathematical Society in Providence or electronically to natices(Qams. arg
or mathcal(Qams . argo
In order to allow participants to arrange their travel plans, organizers of
meetings are urged to submit information for these listings early enough
to allow them to appear in more than one issue of the Notices prior to
the meeting in question. To achieve this, listings should be received in
Providence eight months prior to the scheduled date of the meeting.
The complete listing of the Mathematics Calendar will be published
only in the September issue of the Notices. The March, June, and
December issues will include, along with new announcements, references
to any previously announced meetings and conferences occurring within
the twelve-month period following the month of those issues. New
information about meetings and conferences that will occur later than
the twelve-month period will be announced once in full and will not be
repeated until the date of the conference or meeting falls within the
twelve-month period.
.
The Mathematics Calendar, as well as Meetings and Conferences of
the AMS, is now available electronically through the AMS website on the
World Wide Web. To access the AMS website, use the URi: http://www .
ams. arg/.

NOTICES OF THE AMS

715

Mathematics Calendar
Nashville, USA); Y. Giga (Hokkaido Univ., Sapporo, japan); O.
Ladyzhenskaya (POMI, St. Petersburg, Russia); L. Tatsien (Fudan
Univ., Shanghai, China); V. Mazya (Linkoping Univ., Sweden); J.
Toland (Univ. Bath, UK); N. Trudinger (ANU, Canberra, Australia);
N. Uraltseva (Univ. St. Petersburg, Russia).
Organizers: A consortium of four Portuguese universities (Univ.
Lisbon, Univ. Coimbra, TU Lisboa, and Univ. Beira Interior) in
collaboration with the St. Petersburg Steklov Mathematical Institute.
Program Committee: S. Antontsev (CM-UBI, Covilha); A. Meirmanov
(Univ. Hanty-Mansiisk); j. F. Rodrigues (CMAF-UL, Lisbon); A. Sequeira (CEMAT-IST, Lisbon); G. Seregin (POMI, St. Petersburg); J. M.
Urbano (CMUC, Coimbra).
Deadline: For presentation of contributions: April 30,2003.
Information: M. do Carmo Mateus, CMAF-Universidade de Lisboa,
Av. Prof. Gama Pinto, 2, P-1649-003 Lisboa, Portugal; email: cmaf@
ptmat.fc.ul.pt; tel: +351 217 904 738; fax: +351 217 954 288;
http://www.tpde03.org/.

7- 1 2 Appl icable Harmonic Analys is, Banff International Research
Station, Banff, Alberta, Canada. (Mar. 2003, p. 400)
,'~ 8-11

Algebraic Analysis Conference, on the Occasion of Pierre
Schapira's 60th Birthday, VIU, Island of San Servolo, Venice, Italy.
Scientific and Organizing Committee: A. D'Agnolo (Padua, Italy);
M. Kashiwara (RIMS, japan); F. Loeser (ENS, France); T. Monteiro
Fernandes (DMFCUL, Portugal).
Confirmed Speakers: D. Barlet (Nancy, France); j.-B. Bost (Orsay,
France); L. Boutet de Monvel (lMj, France); E. Frenkel (Berkeley,
USA); V. Ginzburg (Chicago, USA); M. Kapranov (Toronto, Canada);
V. Lafforgue (lMj, France); G. Lebeau (Nice, France); R. Rouquier
(lMj, France); V. Schechtman (Toulouse, France); T. Tanisaki (Osaka,
japan); B. Toen (Nice, France); V. Toledano Laredo (lMj, France); N.
Tose (Keio, japan); B. Tsygan (Northwestern, USA); M. Varagnolo
(Cergy-Pontoise, France); E. Vasserot (Cergy-Pontoise, France); K.
Vilonen (Northwestern, USA).
Information: email: venice03@math. unipd . it; http://www .math.
unipd.it/-venice03/.
8-1 5 41 st International Symposium on Functional Equations,
de la Motte Castle, Noszvaj, Hungary. (Mar. 2003, p. 400)
9-1 3 Workshop on the Sensory Motor System, Mathematical
Biosciences Institute (MB!), The Ohio State University, Columbus,
Ohio. (Feb. 2003, p. 292)

-I~ 9-14 2003

USENIX Annual Technical Conference, San Antonio,

Texas.
Information: http://www . usenix. org/events/usenix03/.
9-14 29th International Summer School "Application of Mathematics in Engineering and Economics", Sozopol, Bulgaria.
(Mar. 2003, p. 400)
9-14 Variational Methods in Celestial Mechanics, AIM Research
Conference Center, Palo Alto, California. (May 2003, p. 602)
10-14 Fifth Dublin Differential Equations Conference, Dublin
City University, Dublin, Ireland. (Feb. 2003, p. 292)
10-14 Groups and Group Rings X, Wisla, Poland. (Feb. 2003,

p.292)
10-14 XIX Rolf Nevanlinna Colloquium, University of jyaskyUi,
jyvaskyla, Finland. (Dec. 2002, p. 1420)
11-1 2 DIMACS Workshop: Algorithms for Multidimensional
Scaling II, Doubletree Hotel, Tallahassee, Florida. (May 2003,
p.602)
11-14 (REVISED) Curvature in Geometry, in Honour of Prof. L.
Van heeke, Grand Hotel Tiziano e dei Congressi, Leece, Italy. (May
2003, p. 602)
11 -1 6 Conference on Partial Differential Equations and Applications in Celebration of Aizik I. Volpert's 80th Birthday,

716

Technion-I.I.T., Haifa, Israel. (Mar. 2003, p. 400)
12-14 Lehigh UniversityGeometry/TopologyConference,Lehigh
University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania. (Apr. 2003, p. 495)
13-22 Poisson Geometry, Deformation Quantisation and Group
Representations (PQR2003), Universersite Libre de Bruxelles,
Belgium. (Jan. 2003, p. 82)
14-19 Integration on Arc Spaces, Elliptic Genus and Chiral
de Rham Complex, Banff International Research Station, Banff,
Alberta, Canada. (Mar. 2003, p. 400)
15-20 Advanced School in the Geometry of the Fourier Mukai
Transform, Grand Hotel Bellavista in Levico Terme, Trento, Italy.
(Apr. 2003, p. 495)
15-22 Fu nctional Analysis VIII, IUC, Dubrovnik, Croatia. (Mar. 2003,
p.400)
1 5-July 4 The Arithmetic, Geometry and Topology of Algebraic
Cycles, Morelia, Mexico. (May 2003, p. 602)
,'~ 16

DIMACS Workshop on the Interface between Biology and
Game Theory, DlMACS Center, Rutgers University, Piscataway, New
jersey.
Short Description: Starting with the pioneering work of john
Maynard Smith, game theory has been increasingly used to explain,
understand, and predict biological phenomena. In a sense, game
theory is even more readily applicable to biology than to economics,
for which it was initially intended, because the concept of human
rationality, a rather uncomfortable assumption, can be replaced
by more robust notions such as evolutionary stability. In recent
years, game theory has been used to explain RNA phage dynamics,
viral latency, chromosome segregation subversion in sexual species,
E. coli mutant proliferationunder environmental stress, and aspects
of competitive bacterial ecology. At this workshop, the first of its
kind, we hope not only to see some of the best work being done
on this exciting interface but also to think of future directions for
exploring it.
Organizers: A. Arkin, Lawrence Berkeley Labs and UC Berkeley;
V. Vazirani, Georgia Tech, vazirani@cc. gatech. edu; D. Wolf,
Lawrence Berkeley Labs, dmwolf@lbl. gov.
Contact: V. Vazirani, Georgia Tech, vazirani@cc . gatech. edu.
Local Arrangements: M. Mercado, DIMACS Center, mercado@
dimacs. rutgers. edu, 732-445-5928.
Information: Visit http://dimacs . rutgers. edu/Workshops/
Biogame/.
16-20 2003 SIAM Annual Meeting, Queen Elizabeth Hotel, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (Sept. 2002, p. 1000)

,'~ 16-20 Su mmer School on Algebraic Combi natorics, Nordfjordeid,

Norway.
Program: The program consists of three series of lectures: (1)
Hyperplane arrangements, (2) Simplicial and geometric complexes
and associated resolutions of ideals, and (3) Cluster algebras
and related phenomena. The lectures will cover basic concepts
from algebraic combinatorics like posets, simplicial complexes, in
particular Cohen-Macaulay and shellability, Mobius functions, and
the Orlik-Solomon algebra.
Speakers: S. Fomin (Michigan), P. Orlik (Wisconsin), V. Welker
(Marburg).
Information: http://www.mi.uib.no/nordag/eid2003 .html.
16-21 International Conference: Kolmogorov and Contemporary
Mathematics, Moscow, Russia. (Sept. 2002, p. 1000)
,'( 17-20 DIMACS Tutorial on Statistical and Other Analytic Health

Surveillance Methods, DIMACS Center, Rutgers University, Piscataway, New jersey.
Descri ption: This tutorial will provide an overview of the challenges
and address an array of statistical surveillance tools and techniques.
The first two days of the tutorial will focus on hands-on use
of specific methodologies through case studies and elementary

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

Mathematics Calendar
introductions. The second two days will be concerned more with
current research activities and new research challenges. The tutorial
will address such topics as: scan statistics, statistical process
control, changepoint methods, Bayesian approaches, rule-based
surveillance, false discovery rate and sequential testing, text data
surveillance.
Sponsor: DIMACS Center.
Organizers: D. Madigan, Rutgers Univ., madigan@stat.rutgers.
edu; H. Rolka, CDC, hrr2@cdc. gov; M. Kulldorff, Univ. of Conn.,
martink@neuron.uchc.edu.
Contacts: D. Madigan, Rutgers Univ., madigan@stat . rutgers. edu.
Local Arrangements: M. Mercado, DIMACS Center, mercado@
dimacs . rutgers. edu, 732-445-5928.
Information:
See
http://dimacs.rutgers. edu/Workshops/
NewerStat/.

17-21 Fourth Geoffrey j. Butler Memorial Conference, University
of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. (Sept. 2002, p. 1000)
17-21 Second NorthAmerican SummerSchool in Logic, Language
and Information (NASSLLI-2003), Bloomington, Indiana. (Apr.
2003, p. 496)
17-24 Furstenfest-Conference on Probability in Mathematics
in Honor of H. Furstenberg, Jerusalem and Beer Sheva, Israel.
(Feb. 2003, p. 293)
18-21 First joint International Meeting between the American Mathematical Society and the Real Sociedad Matematica
Espanola, Seville, Spain. (Sept. 2002, p. 1000)
18-24 (NEW DATE) Some Intermediate Questions of Model Theory and Universal Algebra: ERLOGOL-2003, Novosibirsk State
Technical University, Novosibirsk, Siberia/Russia. (Dec. 2002,
p.1420)
18-28 Instructional Conference in the Mathematical Analysis
of Hydrodynamics, International Centre for Mathematical Science,
Edinburgh, UK. (Mar. 2003, p. 401)
21 Logic and Computational Linguistics, Ottawa, Canada. (Apr.
2003, p. 496)
21-24 Mathematics of Finite Elements and Applications: Satellite
Conference at Brunei University, Isaac Newton Institute for
Mathematical Sciences, Cambridge, England. (Feb. 2003, p. 293)
21-26 Point Processes-Theory and Applications, Banff International Research Station, Banff, Alberta, Canada. (Mar. 2003,
p.401)
22-25 IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS
2003): Call for Workshop Proposals, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(Apr. 2003, p. 496)
23-25 SIAM Conference on Mathematics for Industry: Challenges
and Frontiers, The Metropolitan Hotel, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(Nov. 2002, p. 1287)
23-26 2003 International Multiconference in Computer Science
and Com puter Eng i neeri ng, Monte Carlo Resort, Las Vegas, Nevada.
(Apr. 2003, p. 496)
23-26 Special Track on Agent and Multi-Agent Learning (LAMS),
Las Vegas, Nevada. (Apr. 2003, p. 496)
23-27 15th International Conference on Formal Power Series
and Algebraic Combinatorics, Linkoping University, Vadstena,
Sweden. (Jan. 2003, p. 82)
23-27 Hyperbolic Models in Astrophysics and Cosmology, Newton Institute of Mathematical Sciences, Cambridge, UK. (Jan. 2003,
p.82)
23-27 Integrable Systems & Spectral Curves Conference, Universite de Lille I, Villeneuve d'Ascq, Lille, France. (Apr. 2003,
p.496)
JUNE/JULY 2003

23-27 Workshop on Extremal Graph Theory (Miklos Simonovits
Is 60), Lake Balaton, Hungary. (Oct. 2002, p. 1135)
23-27 Workshop on Harmonic Analysis and Partial Differential
Equations, Puerto Vallarta, Mexico. (Oct. 2002, p. 1135)
23-28 Tools for Mathematical Modelling, Saint-Petersburg State
Technical University, Saint-Petersburg, Russia. (Nov. 2002, p. 1287)
23-29 Symmetry in Nonlinear Mathematical Physics, Institute of
Mathematics, Kiev, Ukraine. (Feb. 2003, p. 293)
~.( 23-july 3

BioMaPS/DIMACS Tutorial: Introduction to Modern
Concepts in Biology for Mathematical and Physical Scientists,

DIMACS Center, Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey.
Description: The goal of the tutorial is to introduce participants
to topics in molecular and cell biology that are relevant to
those who wish to explore or initiate work at the interface
among biology, mathematics, computer science, chemistry, and
physics. The tutorial will be appropriate for graduate students,
postdocs, and midcareer scientists who wish to change direction.
The first week of the tutorial, entitled "The DNA Revolution",
was designed by William Sofer, professor of genetics and member
of the faculty of the Waksman Institute at Rutgers University, to
introduce the fundamentals of modern molecular biology, genetics,
and biotechnology to participants who have little background in
biology or biochemistry. The second week of this tutorial will
start with a review of cell biology that includes lectures given
by Paul Ehrlich, adjunct professor of cell biology and member
of the BioMaPS Institute at Rutgers University. He will examine
energy generation; cell division, including cell cycle control; cell
communication, including adhesion; and apoptosis; as well as
the structure and function of the cytoskeleton, membranes, and
intracellular compartments.
Sponsor: DIMACS Center.
Organizers: W. Sofer, Rutgers Univ., sofer@waksman. rutgers. ed;
P. Ehrlich, Rutgers Univ., pehrlich@lutece . rutgers. edu.
Information:
Biomaps/.

http://dimacs . rutgers. edu/Workshops/

24-26 Fluid Structure Interaction 2003, Cadiz, Spain. (Dec. 2002,
p.1420)
24-27 Day on Diffraction-2003 (DD'03), St. Petersburg Univ.,
St. Petersburg, Russia. (Oct. 2002, p. 1135)
24-28 Nonlinear Modeling and Control,an International Seminar,
Nayanova University, Samara, Russia. (Mar. 2003, p. 401)
25-28 Current Geometry 2003, Palazzo Serra di Cassano, Naples,
Italy. (Mar. 2003, p. 401)
25-28 Mathematics in XXI Century, NovosibirskUniversity, Novosibirsk, Russia. (Sept. 2002, p. 1000)
25-30 2003 International Workshop on Small Sets in Analysis,
Center for Mathematical Sciences, Technion-Israel Institute of
Technology, Haifa, Israel. (Mar. 2003, p. 401)
26-27 Fifth International Workshop on Implicit Computational
Complexity (ICC 2003), Ottawa, Canada. (Apr. 2003, p. 496)
27-29 NKS 2003, Boston, Massachusetts. (May 2003, p. 602)
28-july 3 joint Dynamics, Banff International Research Station,
Banff, Alberta, Canada. (Mar. 2003, p. 402)
29-july 4 BCC19: 19th British Combinatorial Conference, University of Wales, Bangor, North Wales, UK. (Mar. 2003, p. 402)
29-July 19 lAS/Park City Mathematics Institute 13th Annual
Summer Session, Park City, Utah. (Mar. 2003, p. 402)

July 2003
1-December 31 Mathematics and Computation in Imaging Science and Information Processing, Institute for Mathematical Sci-

NOTICES OF THE AMS

717

Mathematics Calendar
ences (IMS), National University of Singapore, Singapore. (Dec. 2002,
p.1420)
1-4 International T. I. Amanov Memorial Conference "Theory of
Functions, Functional Analysis arid Applications", ShakarimSemi-

palatinsk State University, Semipalatinsk, Kazakhstan. (Mar. 2003,
p.402)

7- 18 SMS-NATO ASI: Structu ral Theory of Automata, Sem ig rou ps,
and Universal Algebra, Universite de Montreal, Canada. (Mar. 2003,

p.403)
8-11 Applications of Plausible, Paradoxical, and Neutrosophical
Reasoning for Information Fusion (FUSION 2003), Radisson Hotel,

Cairns, Queensland, Australia. (Jan. 2003, p. 82)

1-5 EuroConference VBAC 2003: Dedicated to Andrei Tyurin,

-:~ 8- 19 NATO Advanced Study In stitute-Conformall nvariance and

Porto, Portugal. (Feb. 2003, p. 293)

6-23 33rd Probability Summer School, Saint-Flour, France. (May

Random Spatial Processes, International Centre for Mathematical
Sciences, Edinburgh, UK.
Description: This meeting is associated with the Isaac Newton
Institute Programme on Interaction and Growth in Complex Stochastic Systems. It takes the form of a NATO Advanced Study
Institute (AS!) with an EPSRC Research Workshop embedded in its
second week. The first week will be aimed at scientists who wish to
learn about recent developments in the topic. The second week will
consist of invited lectures and contributed talks by those working
in the field. It is expected that those attending the first week will
stay on to take part in the workshop. Numbers will be restricted to
around 80 participants, and attendance is therefore by application
or invitation.
Scientific Organizing Committee: G. Lawler (Cornell), K. Khanin
(Landau Inst.), ]. Norris (Cambridge).
Support: The Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council,
NATO, The Isaac NewtonInstitute, the London Mathematical Society.
Dead line: The final date on which applications will be considered
is May 23,2003.
Information: Online application forms and further information is
available by visiting: http://www.ma.hw.ac . uk/icms/meetings/

2003, p. 603)

2003/cirsp/.

1-10 Advanced Course on Polynomial Identity Rings, Bellaterra

(Barcelona), Spain. (Apr. 2003, p. 496)
1-1 0 PI-Rings: Structure and Combinatorial Aspects (Summer
Course), Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain. (Jan. 2003, p. 82)
3-8 Wavelets and Splines, Euler International Mathematical Institute, St. Petersburg, Russia. (Mar. 2003, p. 402)
5-10 Mathematical Biology, Banff International Research Station,

Banff, Alberta, Canada.
6-10 New Connections between Dynamical Systems and PDEs,

AIM Research Conference Center, Palo Alto, California. (May 2003,
p.602)
6-1 2JourneesArithmetiques XXIII, UniversitatGraz, Graz,Austria.

(Jan. 2003, p. 82)
6-1 9 Computational Noncommutative Algebra and Applications,

NATO Advanced Study Institute, II Ciocco Resort, Tuscany, Italy.
(May 2003, p. 603)

7-10 Announcement and Call for Papers: Fourth Panhellenic
Logic Symposium, Thessaloniki, Greece. (Mar. 2003, p. 402)
-:~ 7-10 7th WSEAS International Conferences on Circuits, Systems,

Communications, and Computers, Corfu Island, Greece.
Contact: N. Mastorakis, WSEAS, Ag. Ioannou Theologou 17-23,

9-1 22003 Summer Conference on Topology and Its Applications,

Howard University, Washington, DC. (Jan. 2003, p. 82)
12-1 7 Perspectives in Differential Geometry, Banff International
Research Station, Banff, Alberta, Canada. (Mar. 2003, p. 403)

15773, Zographou, Athens, Greece; tel: (003) 0210 7473313; fax:
(003) 0210 7473314.

.1 2-1 7 What Comes beyond the Standard Model? Symmetries
beyond the Standard Model, Hotel Histrion, Portoroz, Slovenia.

Information: http://www . wseas. org/.

(Jan. 2003, p. 82)

7-11 ICIAM 2003, 5th International Congress on Industrial and
Applied Mathematics, Sydney, Australia. (Apr. 2003, p. 496)

13-28 Diffiety School-A School in the Geometry of Partia~
Differential Equations, S. Stefano del Sole, Avellino, Italy. (Apr.

7-11 International Conference on Algebraic and Topological
Methods in Non-Classical Logics, Tbilisi State University, Tbilisi,

Georgia. (Mar. 2003, p. 403)
~'~ 7-11

International Mathematica Symposium 2003, Imperial College, London, England.
Description: The International Mathematica Symposium is an
interdisciplinary conference for users of Mathematica in research,
education, industry, and commerce. Held every two years, it returns
to England in 2003 for the first time since its inception in 1995. The
symposium is refereed, and a published proceedings is produced
for each conference. If you use Mathematica in research or with
students, or if you have developed or are developing products based
on Mathematica, then the symposium is an opportunity to share
your results with like-minded colleagues. Grants and subsidies are
available for participants in certain categories (please see website).
Keynote Speakers: Confirmed plenary speakers for the symposium:
S. Wolfram, ]. Nash, R. Maeder, B. Buchberger, C. McTague,
Information: Visit the conference website for further details: http:

2003, p. 497)
14-1 5 Mathematics of Computation and Approximation: A
Conference in Honour of the 65th Birthday of Professor Ian
Sloan, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia. (Nov.

2002, p. 1287)
14 or 15 The First International Workshop on Programming
Multi-Agent Systems: Languages, Frameworks, Techniques and
Tools (PROMAS 2003), Melbourne, Australia. (Apr. 2003, p. 497)
14-18 DALT 2003: First International Workshop on Declarative
Agent Languages and Technologies, Melbourne, Australia. '(Apr.

2003, p. 497)
14-18 (NEW DATE) International Conference on Algebras, Modules and Rings, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal. (Oct. 2002,

p.1135)
14-1 8 (POSTPONED TILL FURTHER NOTICE) Wavelet Theory and
Applications: New Directions and Challenges, Institute for Math-

//metric.ma.ic.ac.uk/ims03/.

ematical Sciences, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(Dec.2002,p.1421)
,

7-18 Advanced School in Basic Algebraic Geometry, The Abdus
Salam International Centre for Theoretical Physics (ICTP), Trieste,
Italy. (May 2003, p. 603)

14-26 Summer School on Applications of Advanced Mathematical and Computational Methods to Atmospheric and Oceanic
Problems, National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR),

7-18 Discrete Dynamical Systems and Their Applications to
Population Dynamics, University of Wyoming, Laramie, Wyoming.

(Feb. 2003, p. 293)

718

Boulder, Colorado. (Mar. 2003, p. 403)
15-1 9 Complex Hyperbolic Geometry, CIRM, Luminy, France.

(Mar. 2003, p. 403)
NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLuME 50, NUMBER 6

Mathematics Calendar
"i(

15-19 Progress in Supersymmetric Quantum Mechanics, University of Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain.
Scope: Supersymmetric quantum mechanics (SUSY QM) represents
nowadays a quickly developing area with numerous applications
in different fields of theoretical and mathematical physics. There
are several research groups, as well as a sufficiently large number
of scientists, actively working in this field and presenting their
results in different adjacent conferences. We believe that now is
the time to assemble all of them together. Indeed, this will be the
first conference devoted specifically to SUSY QM.
The conference will be organized in sixteen plenary talks (40
minutes) plus up to fifty 20-minute talks. No parallel sessions will
take place. If necessary, there will be some space reserved for the
presentation of posters.
International Organizing Committee: D. J. Fernandez (CINVESTAV, Mexico DF, Mexico); V. Hussin (CRM, Montreal, Canada); J.
Negro (Univ. de Valladolid, Spain); L. M. Nieto (Univ. de Valladolid,
Spain); B. Samsonov (Tomsk State Univ., Russia).
Plenary Speakers: A. A. Andrianov (INFN, Sezione di Bologna, Italy);
D. Baye (Univ. Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium); C. M. Bender (Washington
Univ., USA); L. J. Boya (Univ. de Zaragoza, Spain); ]. F. Cariiiena
(Univ. de Zaragoza, Spain); A. Khare (lnst. of Physics, Bhubaneswar,
India); G. Levai (Inst. of Nuclear Research of the Hungarian Acad.
of Sci. (ATOMKI), Debrecen, Hungary); B. Mielnik (CINVESTAV-IPN,
Mexico); M. Plyushchay (Univ. de Santiago de Chile, Chile; and Inst.
for High Energy Phys., Protvino, Russia); C. Quesne (Univ. Libre de
Bruxelles, Belgium); A. 1. Solomon (The Open Univ., UK; and Univ.
de Paris VI, France); V. P. Spiridonov (Bogoliubov Lab. of Theoret.
Phys., JINR, Russia); U. P. Sukhatme (State Univ. of New York at
Buffalo, USA); C. V. Sukumar (Oxford Univ., UK); A. P. Veselov
(Loughborough Univ., UK); B. N. Zakharev (Joint Inst. for Nuclear
Research, Lab. Theoret. Phys., Dubna, Russia).
Information:

http://metodos.fam . cie. uva. es/- susy_qm_03/,

email: susy_qm_03@metodos.fam.cie.uva.es.
15-1 9 SIAM Conference on Applied Linear Algebra, William and
Mary College, Williamsburg, Virginia. (Sept. 2002, p. 1001)
~'( 17-20 Xllth Oporto Meeting on Geometry, Topology and Physics,

Departamento de Matematica Pura, Faculdade de Ciencias, Porto
University, Portugal.
Focus: As in previous years, the meeting is focused on the short
courses given by the main speakers, which are supplemented by
seminars by other participants. The talks are at the advanced
graduate or postdoctoral level and should be of interest to all
researchers wishing to learn about recent developments in the
overlap between geometry, topology, and physics.
Main Topics: Mathematics and string theory.
Main Speakers and Courses: T. Gannon (Univ. ofAlberta), Boundary
Conformal Field Theory, Fusion Ring Representations and Strings;
A. Klemm (Humboldt Univ., Berlin), Mirror Symmetry and the
Topological String; M. Marino (Harvard Univ.), Matrix Models and
Chern-Simons Theory; E. Sharpe (Univ. of Illinois), D-Branes and
Sheaves.
Organizing Committee: M. Costa (Oporto, FCUP), email: miguelc@
f c . up. pt; C. Herdeiro (Oporto, FCUP), email: crherdei@fc. up.
pt; J. Mourao (Lisbon, 1ST), email: jmourao@math.ist.utl.pt; R.
Picken (Lisbon, 1ST), email: picken@math.ist.utl.pt; J. N. Tavares
(Oporto, FCUP), email: jntavar@fc.up.pt.
Deadline: For registration: April 30, 2003.

Celebrating the Centenary of Sir William Hodge (1903-1975),

International Centre for Mathematical Science, Edinburgh, UK.
(Mar. 2003, p. 403)
"i(

20-August 9 Summer School on Holomorphic Dynamics, Cortona,

Italy.
Topics: Introduction to Complex Dynamics, T. Gamelin (UCLA);

Special Topics in Complex Dynamics, S. Marmi (SNS).
Supportand Deadline: Anumber of grants will be available for Ph.D.
students wishing to attend the school. Deadline for application:
May 17, 2003 (for non-Italian residents); June 21, 2003 (for Italian
residents); http://www.iaga.fi.cnr.it/SMI/apply. html.
Information:

http://www.iaga.fi.cnr.it/SMI/index . html;

email: smi@iaga.fi.cnr.it.
21-24 Mathematical Problems in Quantum Mechanics, Departamento de Matematica Instituto Superior Tecnico, Lisboa, Portugal.
(Apr. 2003, p. 497)
21-25 Infinite Dimensional Algebras and Quantum Integrable
Systems, Faro, Portugal. (Feb. 2003, p. 293)
"i(

21-25 Summer School on Group Representations, University of
Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal.
Topics: The Summer School will include three courses on group
representations: by R. Carter, Univ. of Warwick; A. Kleshchev, Univ.
of Oregon; and A. Ram, Univ. of Wisconsin at Madison.
Aim: The Summer School is aimed at postgraduate students and
students within a year of completion of a bachelor's degree.
Organizers: The Department of Mathematics and The Center for
Linear Structures and Combinatorics, Univ. of Lisbon.
Information: For more information, please visit the Summer School
homepage at http://hermite.cii . f c. ul. pt/ sschool/.
21-25 The Wfadysfaw Orlicz Centenary Conference and Function
Spaces VII, Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, Adam

Mickiewicz University, Poznan, Poland. (Jan. 2003, p. 83)
21-August liMA 2003 Summer Program: Probability and Partial
Differential Equations in Modern Applied Mathematics, Data
Analysis and Optimization, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,

Minnesota. (Dec. 2002, p. 1421)
21-August 15 Spaces of Kleinian Groups and Hyperbolic 3Manifolds, Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences,

Cambridge, England. (Mar. 2003, p. 404)
21-December 19 Interaction and Growth in Complex Stochastic Systems, Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences,

Cambridge, England. (Mar. 2003, p. 404)
22-26 Equadiff 2003, International Conference on Differential
Equations, Hasselt, Belgium. (Mar. 2003, p. 404)
23-24 Workshop on Categorification and Higher-Order Geometry, Instituto Superior Tecnico, Lisbon, Portugal. (Feb. 2003, p. 293)
23-25 The Joint Meeting of ISAMA 2003 and the 6th Annual
BRIDGES Conference, University of Granada, Spain. (Apr. 2003,

p.497)
23-26 The Joint Meeting of ISAMA 2003 and the 6th Annual
BRIDGES Conference, University of Granada, Spain. (Feb. 2003,

p.293)

Information: http://www.fc.up.pt/mp/actividades/ om. html.

24-26 First Joint ISBA-IMS Meeting, Intercontinental Hotel, Isla
Verde, San Juan, Puerto Rico. (Feb. 2003, p. 294)

19-24 Differential Invariants and Invariant Differential Equations, Banff International Research Station, Banff, Alberta, Canada.

25-26 Young Researchers Symposium of ICMP2003, Instituto
Superior Tecnico (1ST), Lisbon, Portugal. (Apr. 2003, p. 497)

(Mar. 2003, p. 403)
20-25 XV Latinamerican Colloquy of Algebra, Instituto de

Matematicas, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico. (Mar. 2003, p. 403)
20-26 Hodge Theory in a New Century: A Euro Conference
JUNE/JULY 2003

26-31 Analysis and Geometric Measure Theory, Banff International Research Station, Banff, Alberta, Canada. (Mar. 2003, p. 404)
26-31 Algebra and Discrete Mathematics-Symmetries and
Ordered Structu res under the Infl uence of Model Theory and
Combinatorics, Hattingen, Germany. (Dec. 2002, p. 1421)

NOTICES OF THE AMS

719

Mathematics Calendar
and key exchange protocols; Operating systems and application
security: access control, Web security, securing different layers;
Intrusion detection: signature-based methods, anomaly detection,
what to do when intrusions are detected; Network security: firewalls,
denial of service attacks, auditing tools. For each area the goals will
be to introduce the most important and relevant topics. Lectures
will include basic mathematics, tools and techniques, information
about the current state of the art, and suggestions for further
reading for more advanced topics. There will also be individual
guest lectures on additional topics such as privacy, economic
approaches to risk assessment, and digital rights management.
Organizer: R. Wright, Stevens Inst. of Tech.; email: rwright@cs.

27-31 First Announcement of the 11 th International Conference
on Finite or Infinite Dimensional Complex Analysis and Applications, Chiangmai University, Chiangmai, Thailand. (Dec. 2002,
p. 1421)
27-August 2 V International Conference "Nonassociative Algebra and Its Applications", Morelos State University, Cuernavaca,
Morelos, Mexico. (Mar. 2003, p. 404)
27-August 9 (NEW DATE) Banach Algebras and Their Applications: Banach Algebras 2003, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. (Sept.
2002, p. 1001)
"i:

28-31 III World Conference on Paraconsistency (WCP3), IRIT,
Toulouse, France.
Description: Paraconsistent logics deal sensibly with contradictory
yet nontrivial theories. The core of the subject is a collection of
mathematical techniques, philosophically well motivated and with
numerous technological applications.
Information: Visit http://www.irit.fr/wcp3/ or http://www .

stevens-tech.edu.
Contact: R. Wright, Stevens Inst. of Tech., rwright@cs. stevenstech. edu.
Local Arrangements: M. Mercado, DlMACS Center, mercado@
dimacs . rutgers. edu, 732-445-5928.
Information: Visit http://dimacs.rutgers.edu/Workshops/
ComputerSecurity/.

cle.unicamp.br/wcp3/.

28- 31 9th International Conference on Appl ications of Computer
Algebra, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina.
(Mar. 2003, p. 405)
28-August 1 The 8th International Conference on Difference
Equations and Applications, Brno, Czech Republic. (Mar. 2003,
p.405)
28-August 2 XIVlnternational Congresson Mathematical Physics,
University of Lisbon, Portugal. (Apr. 2003, p. 497)
28-August 31 Stein's Method and Applications: A Program
in Honor of Charles Stein, Institute for Mathematical Sciences,
National University of Singapore, Singapore. (Mar. 2003, p. 405)
29-August 1 Tenth Workshop on Logic, Language, Information
and Computation (WoLLIC'2003), Ouro Preto, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(Feb. 2003, p. 294)
29-August 2 IMS New Researchers Conference, University of
California, Davis, California. (Feb. 2003, p. 294)

August 2003
2-7 Monge-Ampere Type Equations and Applications, Banff
International Research Station, Banff, Alberta, Canada. (Mar. 2003,
p.405)
-,': 3-8 Spaces of Kleinian Groups and Hyperbolic 3-Manifolds, Isaac
Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences, Cambridge, UK.
Information: Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences, 20
Clarkson Road, Cambridge, CB3 OEH UK; tel: +44 (0) 1223 335999;
fax: +44 (0) 1223 330508; email: info@newton. cam. ac. uk. Further
information and application forms are available from the WWW at:
http://www.newton.cam.ac.uk/programs/SKG/skgw01.html.

"i:

4-8 12th USENIX Security Symposium, Washington, DC.
Information: http://www . usenix. org/events/sec03/.

4-9 4th International Algebraic Conference, Lviv, Ukraine. (Mar.
2003, p. 405)
4-9 Holomorphic Curves in Contact Geometry, AIM Research
Conference Center, Palo Alto, California. (May 2003, p. 603)
4-9 Transformation Groups ,and Related Topics: An I nternationa~
Conference in Honor of Soren Ulman to Celebrate His 60th
Birthday, Helsinki, Finland. (Mar. 2003, p. 405)
4-22 Su m mer School and Conference on Real Algebraic Geometry
and Its Applications, The Abdus Salam International Centre for
Theoretical Physics (ICTP), Trieste, Italy. (May 2003, p. 603)
5-9 13th Capricornio Mathematical Congress, Universidad
Cat6lica del Norte, Antofagasta, Chile. (Mar. 2003, p. 406)
5-1 0 Workshops Loops '03, Prague, Czech Republic. (Mar. 2003,
p.406)
6-9 Workshop, Spectral Geometry of Manifolds with Boundary
and Decomposition of Manifolds, Field Laboratory S0minestation
at Holbcek Bay near Copenhagen, Roskilde University, Denmark.
(May 2003, p. 603)
9-14 Combinatorics, Linear Algebra & Graph Coloring, Tehran,
Iran. (Mar. 2003, p. 406)
9-16 Defects and Their Dynamics, Banff International Research
Station, Banff, Alberta, Canada. (Mar. 2003, p. 406)
9-16 Localization Behavior in Reaction-Diffusion Systems and
Applications to the Natural Sciences, Banff International Research
Station, Banff, Alberta, Canada. (Mar. 2003, p. 406)

3-9 The Third International Conference: Creativity in Mathematics Education and the Education of Gifted Students
(lCCME&EGS'03), Rousse, Bulgaria. (Apr. 2003, p. 498)

3-9 29th Stochastic Processes and Their Applications, Hotel do
Frade, Angra dos Reis, State of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. (Dec. 2002,
p. 1421)
"i:

4-7 DIMACS Tutorial on Computer Security, DlMACS Center,
Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey.
Description: This week-long tutorial will be designed to provide
background knowledge to researchers and graduate students who
wish to participate in the special focus or to get just an introduction
to some of the fundamental issues in this field. The tutorial will
consist of lectures and hands-on activities. Topics included are
not intended to cover all aspects of the special focus but will
concentrate instead on several main themes. These will include:
Cryptographic primitives and protocols: private key cryptography,
public key cryptography, definitions of security, authentication

720

10-1 7 Loops '03, Prague, Czech Republic. (Mar. 2003, p. 406)
11-1 5 Workshop on Finsler Geometry and Its Applications,
Debrecen, Hungary. (Apr. 2003, p. 498)
12-16 Conformal Structure in Geometry, Analysis, and Physics,
AIM Research Conference Center, Palo Alto, California. (May 2003,
p.603)
-,': 14-20 2003 ASL European Summer Meeting (Logic Colloquium
'03), Helsinki, Finland. (Sept. 2002, p. 1001)
Program Committee: P. Aczel, Z. Adamowicz, j. Baldwin, E.
Bouscaren, M. Detlefsen, M. Gitik, L. Hella, T. Jech, R. Parikh, H.
Schwichtenberg, T. Slaman, V. Stoltenberg-Hansen (Chair), and j.
Vaananen.
Organizing Committee: A. Halko, A. Hellsten, T. Huuskonen,
j. Kennedy, j. Kontinen, K. Luosto, H. Niemisto, J. Oikkonen,
M. Pauna, ]. Ruokolainen, M. Saria, and ]. Vaananen.
Information: http://www.helsinki.fi/lc2003/.

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

Mathematics Calendar
1 5-20 12th Summer St. Petersburg Meeting in Mathematical
Analysis: Dedicated to the 70th Anniversary of Victor Petrovich
Havin, Euler International Mathematical Institute, St. Petersburg,

International Research Station, Banff, Alberta, Canada. (Mar. 2003,
p.406)

Russia. (Mar. 2003, p. 406)

24-26 Second St. Petersburg Days of logic and Computability:
Devoted to the Centennial of Andrei Andreevich Markov Jr.,

16-21 Current Trends in Arithmetic Geometry and Number Theory, Banff International Research Station, Banff, Alberta, Canada.

Euler International Mathematical Institute, St. Petersburg, Russia.
(Mar. 2003, p. 406)

(Mar. 2003, p. 406)

* 25-30 Workshop on Calculus of Variations: Geometric Problems,
Superconductivity, and Material Microstructures, The Fields
Institute, Toronto, Ontario.
Organizing Committee: S. Alama (McMaster); L. Bronsard (McMaster); R. Choksi (Simon Fraser); R. Jerrard (Toronto); R. McCann
(Toronto).
Information: See http://www.fields.utoronto.ca/programs/
scientific/03-04/pde/variations/.

18-22 7th International Symposium on Orthogonal Polynomials, Special Functions and Applications, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(Dec. 2002,p. 1421)
1 8-22 ENUMATH 2003: The European Conference on Numerical
Mathematics and Advanced Applications, Prague, Czech Republic.

(Feb. 2003, p. 294)
;~ 18-22

Random Walks in Random Environment, Isaac Newton
Institute for Mathematical Sciences, Cambridge, UK.
Information: Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences, 20
Clarkson Road, Cambridge, CB3 OEH UK; tel: +44 (0) 1223 335999;
fax: +44 (0) 1223 330508; email: info@newton.cam.ac.uk. Further
information and application forms are available from the WWW at:
http://www.newton.cam.ac.uk/programs/IGS/igsw02.html.

;'~ 20-23 Ordinal and Symbolic Data Analysis, University of Califor-

nia, Irvine, California.
Information: Please see the meeting website: http://hypatia. ss.
uci.edu/imbs/workshops/OSDA/index.htm.
;'~ 20-28

Introductory Workshop in Discrete and Computational
Geometry, Mathematical Sciences Research Institute, Berkeley,

California.
Organizers: J. A. De Loera, H. Edelsbrunner,]. E. Goodman, J. Pach,

M. Sharir, E. Welzl, and G. M. Ziegler.
Workshop Topics: This workshop is intended to introduce the
area of discrete and computational geometry to mathematicians
and computer scientists not (yet) active in the field or just entering
it and is aimed particularly at graduate students and postdocs and
at researchers who may already be working in other, but related,
areas. It will highlight the interaction between mathematical and
algorithmic aspects of the field.
Speakers: The speakers, each of whom will give a pair of onehour talks, are all leading researchers in the field and have been
chosen especially for their accessible styles. They are as follows:
B. Sturmfels, Tropical Geometry; J. Hass, Minimal Surfaces and
Normal Surfaces in 3-Manifolds; J. Lagarias, Quasicrystals and Discrete Geometry, Density of Sphere Packings; E. Demaine, Folding
& Unfolding: Linkage Folding, Computational Origami; R. Graham,
Euclidean Ramsey Theory, Packing Equal Discs in Planar Regions; G.
M. Ziegler, 4-Dimensional Polytopes; ]. O'Rourke, Folding & Unfolding: Folding Polygons to Convex Polyhedra, Unfolding Polyhedra;
E. Welzl, Combinatorial Models for Solving Linear Programs, k-Sets
and j-Facets; G. Kalai, Graphs and Skeleta of Polytopes; D. Eppstein, Computational Geometry and Robust Statistics; Hyperbolic
Geometry, Moebius Transformations, and Geometric Optimization;
R. Gardner, Discrete Tomography: A Survey, Reconstruction of
Convex Bodies from Brightness Functions; I. Barany, Combinatorial
Convexity: Theorems of Caratheodory, Helly, Radon and Tverberg; Algebraic Topology Applied in Geometry; R. Forman, Topics
in Combinatorial Differential Geometry; N. Amenta, Finding Objects in the Delaunay Triangulation, Actually Doing It: Algorithms
and Programs for 3D Delaunay Triangulation; J. Pach, Geometric
Graph Theory; A. Barvinok, Complexity of Convex Bodies in Higher
Dimensions.
Deadlines: Registration with funding support application: May 15,
2003. Registration, no funding request: August 5, 2003.
Registration and Information: Register online: http://www .msri.
org/calendar/workshops/Workshoplnfo/248/show_
workshop/.
23-28 Computational Techniques for Moving Interfaces, Banff

JUNE/JULY 2003

28-30 International Conference on Computability and Complexity in Analysis, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(Feb. 2003, p. 294)
30-September 4 A Workshop in Creative Scientific Writing, Banff
International Research Station, Banff, Alberta, Canada. (Mar. 2003,
p.407)
30-September 4 locally Finite lie Algebras, Banff International
Research Station, Banff, Alberta, Canada. (Mar. 2003, p. 407)

* 31-September 4 Unity of mathematics, in honor of 90th birthday
of I. M. Gelfand, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Speakers: M. Atiyah, A. Beilinson, ]. Bernstein, A. Connes, R. Dijkgraaf, V. Drinfeld, B. Feigin, D. Gaitsgory, A. Givental, M. Hopkins,
D. Kazhdan, M. Kontsevich, B. Kostant, G. Lusztig, D. McDuff,
S. Novikov, P. Sarnak, A. Schwartz, 1. Singer, C. Vafa, A. Vershik,
S.-T. Yau.
Organizing committee: P. Etingof, R. Falk, V. Guillemin, J. Harris,
D. Kazhdan, V. Retakh, I. Singer, R. Wilson.
Sponsors: National Science Foundation (tentative), Clay Mathematics Institute, Mathematics departments of Harvard University, MIT,
and Rutgers University.
Information:
http://www-math .mit. edu/ conf erences/
unityofmathematics/.

September 2003
* 2003-july 2004 Set Theory, Centre de Recerca Matematica, Bellaterra, Spain.
Organizers: Local: J. Bagaria (ICREA and Univ. of Barcelona); Visitor:
S. Todorcevic (CNRS).
Main Research Topics: Ramsey methods in functional analysis,
the continuum problem.
Other Research Topics: Applications of combinatorial set theory
and forcing to general topology and Boolean algebras; Inner
model theory for large cardinals; Generic absoluteness and its
consequences in combinatorics and descriptive set theory; Current
topics in descriptive set theory; Current topics in combinatorial
set theory.
Seminars: There will be two weekly seminars on Set Theory
(coordinated by ]. Bagaria) and Combinatorics and Its Applications
to Analysis (coordinated by S. Todorcevic).
Conference: Barcelona Conference on Set Theory; Dates: September 16-20, 2003;http://www.crm.es/set-theory/.
Advanced Course: Advanced Course on Ramsey Methods in
Analysis; Dates: January 19-28, 2004; http://www.crm.es/
RamseyMethods/.
Information: Centre de Recerca Matematica, Apartat 50, 08193
Bellaterra, Spain; tel: +34 935 811 081; fax: +34935 812 202; http:
/ /www.crm.es/.

* 1-3 4th WSEAS Multiconference in Applied Mathematics, Malta,
Italy.
Description: The WSEAS multiconference in linear algebra, numerical analysis, differential equations, optimization, probability and

NOTICES OF THE AMS

721

Mathematics Calendar
statistics, operational research, computers, education, algorithms,
discrete mathematics and control is the fourth in the successful
history of the conference that was held in Athens, Greece (2000);
Cairns, Australia (2001); and Miedyzydroje, Poland (2002). As in
2002 in the conference in Poland, all the accepted papers will be
published in WSEAS Transactions on Mathematics.
Information: http://www . wseas. org/.
1-6 The Sixth International Workshop on Differential Geometry
and Its Applications and The Third German-Romanian Seminar
on Geometry, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. (Oct. 2002, p. 1135)
1-December 19 Granular and Particle-Laden Flows, Isaac Newton
Institute for Mathematical Sciences, Cambridge, England. (Mar.
2003, p. 407)
2-5 Symposium for the Developments of the Cantorian Set
Theory, Paris, France. (Jan. 2003, p. 83)
2-6 The Barcelona Conference on Asymptotic Statistics, Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain. (Jan. 2003, p. 83)
~': 3-5 2003 Joint Conference on Declarative Programming: APPIA-

GULP-PRODE 2003, Reggio Calabria, Italy.
Description: The aim of the conference is to foster scientific cooperation between Italian, Portuguese, Spanish, and Latin American,
researchers-although submissions are open to the whole declarative programming community-to improve the knowledge of the
state of the art of declarative programming (through the invited
talks) and to show ongoing research done (through presentations
of papers).
Information: http://www.informatica.ing.unirc.it/agp03/ or
email: agpo@mat.unical.it.
4-9 Analytic Methods of Analysis and Differential Equati'ons (AMADE-2003), Belarusian State University, Minsk, Belarus.
(Jan. 2003, p. 83)
-J:

5-1 0 6th International Conference on Geometry and Applications, Varna, Bulgaria.
Topics: Foundations of Geometry and Incidence Geometry, Differential Geometry, Applications of Computers in Geometry, Geometry
in the School.
Conference Chairs: W. Benz (Hamburg), G. Stanilov (Sofia).
Information: G. Stanilov, email: stanilov@fmi.uni-sofia.bg; Ch.
Lozanov, email: lozanov@fmi.uni-sofia.bg.
8-1 0 25th World Conference on Boundary Element Methods:
BEM 25: Incorporating Electromagnetic Effects on Human Beings
and Equipment Seminar, Split, Croatia. (Oct. 2002, p. 1135)

-J:

8-1 2 BSDCon'03, San Mateo, California.
Information: http://www . usenix. org/events/bsdcon03/.
8-1 2 Eurocomb'03-European Conference on Combinatorics,
Graph Theory and Applications, Prague, CzechRepublic. (Apr. 2003,
p.498)
8-December 13 Inverse Problems: Computational Methods and
Emerging Applications, Institute for Pure and Applied Mathematics, UCLA, Los Angeles, California. (Oct. 2002, p. 1135)

, 10-12 Sixth International Conference on Computational Methods for the Solution of Electrical and Electromagnetic Engineering Problems: ELECTROCOMP 2003, Split, Croatia. (Oct. 2002,
p.1135)
11-1 4 Logic, Game Theory and Social Choice 3, University of
Siena, Certosa di Pontignano, Siena, Italy. (Apr. 2003, p. 498)
12-14 EMS Mathematical Weekend, Gulbenkian Foundation, Lisbon, Portugal. (Apr. 2003, p. 498)
12-16 International Conference of Computational Methods
in Sciences and Engineering (lCCMSE 2003), Kastoria, Greece.
(Feb. 2003, p. 294)

722

* 12-1 7 Combinatorics in Oporto, University I of Porto, Porto,
Portugal.
Main Topics: Graph Theory, Matroid Theory (including Coxeter
Matroids and Oriented Matroid Theory) and Convex Geometry.
Program: (a) Two minicourses (September 12 and 13), specially
designed for students andyoung researchers, byM. Lemos (Univ. Fed.
Pernambuco, Brazil): "Interaction between Graphs and Matroids",
and U. Brehm (Tech. Univ. Dresden, Germany): "Polyhedral Maps";
(b) talks (September 15, 16, and 17): a series of eight to nine invited
talks of 50 minutes and thirteen to fifteen contributed talks of 25
minutes; (c) poster session.
Invited Speakers: j. Bokowski (Tech. Univ. Darmstadt, Germany),
A. Borovik (UMIST, Manchester, UK), U. Brehm (Tech. Univ. Dresden,
Germany), j. Dias da Silva (Univ. Lisboa, Portugal), D. Larman (Univ.
College of London, UK), M. Las Vergnas (CNRS, Paris, France), M.
Lemos (Univ. Fed. Pernambuco, Brazil), M. Noy (Univ. Politecnica
Catalunya, Spain), j. Szwarcfiter (Univ. Fed. Rio de janeiro, Brazil).
Deadline: For sending abstracts, june 10, 2003.
Information: http://www.fc.up.pt/mp/ comb03/.
15-1 9 Colloquium on the Occasion of the 200th Anniversary
of Charles-Fran~ois Sturm and Workshop on Sturm-Liouville
Theory, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. (Oct. 2002,
p.1135)
15-191MA Tutorial: Open Week Tutorial, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, Minnesota. (Mar. 2003, p. 407)
15-21 International Conference on Nonlinear Partial Differentia~
Equations, Alushta, the Crimea, Ukraine. (May 2003, p. 603)
* 15-21 Optimization, Approximation, and Multiscale Analysis
with Applications to Signal and Image Processing, Borovez (Rila
Mountains), Bulgaria.
Description: The minisymposium will be accompanying the International Congress Massee 2003, a conference organized by the
Mathematical Society of SouthEastern Europe (MASSEE).
Organizing and Program Committee: H. Gonska (Chair), Dniv. of
Duisburg-Essen, Germany; D. Kacso (Secretary), tJniv. of DuisburgEssen, Germany; O. Kounchev (Co-chair), Inst. of Mathematics and
Informatics, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia; P. Nettaanrnaki,
Univ. of jyvaskyHi, Finland; H. Render, Univ. of Duisburg-Essen,
Germany; j. Sprekels, Weierstrass Inst. for Applied Analysis and
Stochastics, Berlin, Germany; D. Tiba, Inst. of Mathematics, Romanian Academy of Sciences, Bucharest.
Invited Speakers: A. Bejancu, Univ. of Leeds, UK; B. Bojanov,
Sofia Univ. and Bulgarian Academy of Sciences; F.-j. Delvos, Univ. of
Siegen, Germany; W. Haugmann, Dniv. of Duisburg-Essen, Germany;
B. Sendov, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences; D.-X. Zhou, City Univ.,
Hong Kong.
Information: Information on the minisymposium: http://www .
math. bas. bg/"'kounchev/Workshop2003. html. Information on the
International Congress Massee 2003: http://www.math.bas.bg/
massee2003/. Email inquiries should be directed to kounchev@
math. bas. bg or tiba@wias-berlin. de.

16-20 The Barcelona Conference on Set Theory, Bellaterra,
Barcelona, Spain. (Jan. 2003, p. 83)
22-26 Analytic Dynamical Systems, Summability of Divergent
Series and Galois Theories, Universite Paul Sabatier, Toulouse,
France. (Mar. 2003, p. 407)
24-26 International Conference on Differential Equations Devoted to the 100th Anniversary of K. P. Persidskii, Institute of
Mathematics of the ME&S of the RK, Almaty, Kazakhstan (CIS).
(Sept. 2002, p. 1001)

* 29-30 Workshop "High-Resolution Schemes for ConvectionDominated Flows: 30 Years of FCT", University of Dortmund,
Germany.
Scope: Convection-dominated flows are notoriously difficult to treat
numerically. Solutions produced by standard discretization tech-

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

Mathematics Calendar
niques are corrupted by nonphysical oscillations and/or excessive
numerical diffusion. The first high-resolution scheme to overcome
these shortcomings was the now classical Flux-Corrected-Transport
(FCT) algorithm introduced 30 years ago by Boris and Book. Their
pioneering idea of blending high- and low-order discretizations
has paved the way for the development of a whole range of highresolution schemes which use flux/slope limiters to prevent the
formation of wiggles in the vicinity of shocks and discontinuities
while retaining the high accuracy of approximation in regions
where the solution is sufficiently smooth. The aim of this 2-day
workshop is to provide a forum for discussion of the progress made
in the numerical simulation of convection-dominated flows during
the three decades elapsed since the birth of FCT. Scientists from
around the globe are encouraged to present their results regarding
recent trends and developments in this challenging research field.
Organizing Committee: D. Kuzmin, Univ. of Dortmund, Germany;
R. Loehner, George Mason Univ., USA; S. Turek, Univ. of Dortmund,
Germany.
Speakers: The tentative list of speakers includes leading experts
(D. L. Book, R. Loehner, S. Zalesak) who have laid the foundations of
the FCT methodology and demonstrated its potential in a variety
of spectacular CFD simulations.
Information: An online registration form will be available shortly
at the homepage of the workshop: http://www . mathematik. unidortmund.de/lsiii/conf/fct30.html.

29-0ctober 3 IMA Workshop 1: Statistical Methods for Gene
Expression: Microarrays and Proteomics, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, Minnesota. (Mar. 2003, p. 407)
30-0ctober 3 International Silk Road Conference: Quantum
Theory, Partial Differential Equations of Mathematical Physics
and Their Applications, Tashkent, Uzbekistan. (May 2003, p. 604)
30-0ctober 7 Mathematics in Armenia-Advances and Perspectives, Institute of Mathematics of National Academy of Sciences of
Armenia, Yerevan, Armenia. (Feb. 2003, p. 295)

a main focus on network optimization. Special attention will be
given to the latest technologies and to the challenges encountered
therein.
Deadlines: Short paper submission deadline: April 25, 2003.
Notification of acceptance: July 14, 2003. Long paper submission
(optional): August 16, 2003. Submission of camera-ready short
papers: August 16, 2003. Deadline for early conference registration:
September 19, 2003.
Information:
http://www.int-evry . fr /INOC2003/;
email:
inoc2003-oc©int-evry.fr.

28-31 Fourteenth International Symposium on Methodologies
for Intelligent Systems, Maebashi TERRSA, Maebashi City, Japan.
(Feb. 2003, p. 295)

November 2003
3-5 Second International Conference on Computational Methods
in Multiphase Flow, Santa Fe, New Mexico. (Oct. 2002, p. 1135)
3-8 IV International Colloquium on Differential Equations and
Applications, Maracaibo, Venezuela. (Apr. 2003, p. 498)
4-6 Seventh International Conference on Computational Modelling of Free and Moving Boundary Problems, Santa Fe, New
Mexico. (Oct. 2002, p. 1135)
;', 7-9 Weekend Algebra Meeting, Florida Atlantic University, Boca
Raton, Florida.
Format: The format is simple, there is no registration fee, and,
conversely, we cannot offer honoraria or travel reimbursement
(except for graduate students and young Ph.D.'s; see below). We
are planning to have 20-minute presentations on Friday afternoon,
Saturday morning, and Sunday morning. On Saturday afternoon
there will be a special session on current directions and emerging
opportunities in our areas of research. The department plans to
host a banquet on Friday evening and a party on Saturday evening.
Organizers: L. Klingler (klingler©fau. edu) and M. Schmidmeier
(mschmidm©f au. edu).
Sponsor: The Charles E. Schmidt College of Science of Florida

October 2003

Atlantic University.
Su pport: We have applied for NSF support for graduate students
and young Ph.D.'s (travel and local expenses).
Information and Registration: We are going to send out the
second email announcement in May. If you haven't received the
first announcement but want us to keep you informed, please preregister at http://www .math. fau. edu/weekend-algebra/; send
an email to one of the organizers; or send a fax to Weekend Algebra
Meeting 2003 (561-297-2436).

2-4 AMS Joint Central and Western Section Meeting, University
of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado (May 2003, p. 604)
11-1 2 AMS Eastern Section Meeting, SUNY-Binghamton, Binghamton, New York. (Sept. 2002, p. 1001)
13-17 2003 IEEEjWIC International Conference on Web Intelligence (WI 2003), Tianlun Dynasty Hotel, Beijing, China. (Feb. 2003,
p.295)
15-20 Von Neumann Centennial Conference: Linear Operators
and Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, Budapest, Hungary.

10-1 3 SIAM Conference on Geometric Design & Computing,

(Sept. 2002, p. 1001)

Elliott Grand Hyatt, Seattle, Washington. (Nov. 200'2, p. 1287)

20-24 IMA Workshop 2: Comparative Genomics, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota. (Mar. 2003, p. 408)
20-25 International Symposium of Mathematics, Analysis and
Probability, Hammamet, Tunisia. (Apr. 2003, p. 498)
24-25 AMS Southeastern Section Meeting, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina. (Sept. 2002, p. 1001)
'k

26-31 LISA'03-17th Systems Administration Conference, San
Diego, California.
Information: http://www . usenix. org/events/lisa03/. ,

;', 27-29 International Network Opti m ization Conference, Institut
National des Tel€~communications,Evry/Paris, France.
Scope: Information sciences and communication technologies are
increasingly both a main focus and a major application of wellestablished as well as emerging theories and techniques. Examples
are operations research,. graph theory and queueing theory, in
addition to stochastic search, to state just a few. The aim of this
conference is to bring together people from those disciplines with
JUNE/JULY 2003

-k

14-1 8 Workshop on Patterns in Physics, The Fields Institute,
Toronto, Ontario.
Organizing Committee: R. Almgren, N. Ercolani (Chair), D. Henderson, J. Lega, M. Pugh.
Information:

http://www.fields.utoronto.ca/programs/

scientific/03~04/pde/physics/index.html.

17-21 IMA Workshop 3: Networks and the Population Dynamics
of Disease Transmission, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
Minnesota. (Mar. 2003, p. 408)
;', 19-22 ICDM '03: The Third IEEE International Conference on
Data Mining, Melbourne, Florida.
Call for Papers: Papers due: June 10, 2003.
Invited Speakers: T. G. Dietterich, Oregon State Univ.; U. M. Fayyad,
digiMine.com; H. Mannila, Univ. of Helsinki, Finland; G. W. Myers,
Univ. of California, Berkeley; P. S. Yu, IBM T. ]. Watson Research
Center.
Scope: Areas of interest are machine learning, automated scientific
discovery, statistics, pattern recognition, ,knowledge acquisition,

NOTICES OF THE AMS

723

Mathematics Calendar
soft computing, databases and data warehousing, data visualization, and knowledge-based systems. As an important part of the
conference, the workshops program will focus on new research
challenges and initiatives, and the tutorial program will cover
emerging data mining technologies and the state-of-the-art of data
mining developments.
Information: http://www . cs. UVID. edu/-xwu/icdm-03 .html.
Further Information: Xindong Wu (ICDM 2003), Department of

Computer Science, University of Vermont, 351 Votey Building,
Burlington, VT 05405; phone: 802-656-7839; fax: 802-656-0696;
email: xwu@cs . UVID. edu.
~'~ 26-29 Modern Problems of Mathematical Physics and Informa-

tional Technologies, National University of Uzbekistan, Tashkent,

Uzbekistan.
Description: The conference is devoted to modern problems in
the area of differential equations and IT science. Scientists of any
scientific background are welcome to participate (students, Ph.D.
students, and professional researchers).
Topics: (1) Degenerating equations and mixed type equations,
(2) Spectral theory of differential operators, (3) Boundary value
problems of differential equations and their applications, (4)
Calculus and information technologies.
Dead line: Deadline for submitting papers (J8.TEX file, no more than
5 papers) is June 1, 2003.
Information: (in Russian): http://www.nuu.uz/conf/.

December 2003
~': 8-1 2

Stochastic Methods in Coagulation and Fragmentation,

Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences, Cambridge, UK.
Information: Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences, 20
Clarkson Road, Cambridge, CB3 OEH UK; tel: +44 (0) 1223 335999;
fax: +44 (0) 1223 330508; email: info@newton. cam. ac. uk. Further
information and application forms are available from the WWW at:
http://www.newton.cam.ac.uk/programs/IGS/igsw04.html.

14-16 International Conference on Matrix Analysis and Applications, Nova Southeastern University, Fort Lauderdale, Florida.
(Mar. 2003, p. 408)
15-19 Numerical Methods in Imaging Science and Information
Processing, Institute for Mathematical Sciences, National University

7~ 20-22

International Symposium on Recent Advances in Mathematics & Its Applications (ISRAMA 2003), Kolkata (Calcutta),

India.
Topics: Algebra, Discrete Mathematics & Theoretical Computer Science; Analysis & Topology and Their Applications; Geometry and Its

Applications; Dynamical Systems, Chaos and Fractals; Continuum
Mechanics; Plasma Physics; Control Theory and Optimization Theory; Bio-mechanics; Applications of Mathematics to Environmental
Problems; History and Philosophy of Physical Science; Quantum
Information Theory. All deliberations in the symposium shall take
place in English.
Registration Fee: US $200 for each participant from other countries
(local hospitality will be provided).
Contact: All correspondence regarding the symposium should be
addressed to: M. R. Adhikari, Secretary, Calcutta Mathematical
Society, Physics & Applied Mathematics Unit, AE-374, Sector-I,
Salt Lake City, Calcutta-700064, India; email: cms@ca12.vsnl.net .
in; H. P. Mazumdar, Convenor; Indian Statistical Institute, 203
B. T. Road, Calcutta-700035, India; hpm@isical.ac. in.
7~ 22-25 International Conference on Analysis and Applications,

Department of Mathematics, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi
221 005, India.
Conference Themes: Recent trends of researches in classical and
modern analysis including functional analysis, operator theory,
distribution theory, harmonic analysis and wavelets, optimization theory, approximation theory, computational analysis and
differential equations.
Invited speakers: R. D. Charmichael (USA), J. Schmeelk (USA), S.
Pilipovic' (Yugoslavia), K. Fujita (Japan), S. Watanabe (Japan), H. P.
Dikshit (India), P. K. Jain (India), S. Kesavan (India), G. Mishra (India),
U. B. Tewari (India), ]. N. Pandey (Canada), S. P. Singh (Canada), H.
M. Srivastava (Canada), M. W. Wong (Canada).
Call for Papers: Abstract of contributed papers should be sent by
July 31,2003. Proceedings of the conference will be published.
Infor'mation: N. Lal, R. S. Pathak, Dept. of Math., Banaras Hindu
Univ., Varanasi 221 005, India; tel: 091-542-2575262/2275662; fax:
091-542-2368174; email: rspathak@banaras. ernet. in; http: I I
ramshankarpathak@yahoo.co.in/.

January 2004

of Singapore, Singapore. (Dec. 2002, p. 1422)

7-9 IMA Short Course: The Internet for Mathematicians, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota. (Mar. 2003, p. 408)

15-1 9 The 8th Asian Technology Conference in Mathematics,
Chung Hua University, Hsin-Chu, Taiwan. (Apr. 2003, p. 499)

7-1 0 joint Mathematics Meetings, Phoenix Civic Plaza, Phoenix,
Arizona. (Sept. 2002, p. 1001)

17-20 First joint International Meeting between the American
Mathematical Society and Various Indian Mathematical Societies,

9-1 0 2003-04 ASL Winter Meeting (with joint Mathematics
Meetings), Phoenix, Arizona. (Apr. 2003, p. 499)

Bangalore, India. (Sept. 2002, p. 1001)
~': 19-21

WSEAS Multiconferences, Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain.
Description: The multiconference is the 4th in the successfull

history of the conference that was held in Athens, Greece (2000),
Cairns, Australia (2001), Miedyzydroje, Poland (2002). As in 2002 in
the conference in Poland, all the accepted papers will be published
in WSEAS Transactions on Mathematics.
Topics: 4th WSEAS International Conference on Mathematics and
Computers in Biology and Chemistry (MCBC'03) with special emphasis on: Bioengineering, molecular biology, mathematical biology,
biochemistry, biophysics, computer biology, biological dynamical
systems. 4th WSEAS International Conference on mathematics
and computers in business and economics (MCBC'04) (theoretical,
mathematical, computational, statistical, experimental methods
for economics, business and management science and applications). 7th WSEAS Int.Conf. on 4th WSEAS International Conference
on Automation & Information (ICAI'03). 4th WSEAS International
Conference on acoustics, music, speech and language processing
(ICAMSL 2003) (former acoustics and music: theory and applications).
Information: http://www . wseas. org/.

724

11 IMA Tutorial: Measurement, Modeling and Analysis of the
Internet, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
Organizer: B. Hajek (Illinois), D. Towsley (Massachusetts). (Mar.
2003, p. 408)
12-16 IMA Workshop 4: Measurement, Modeling and Analysis
of the Internet, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
(Mar. 2003, p. 408)
19-July 9 Statistical Mechanics of Molecular and Cellular Biological Systems, Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences,
Cambridge, England. (Mar. 2003, p. 408)
21-30 Advanced Course on Ramsey Methods in Analysis, Bellaterra (Barcelona), Spain. (Apr. 2003, p. 499)
26-July 16 Random Matrix Approaches in Number Theory, Isaac
Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences, Cambridge, England.
(Mar. 2003, p. 408)

February 2004
2-13 Advanced Course on Contemporary Cryptology, Bellaterra
(Barcelona), Spain. (Apr. 2003, p. 499)

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

Mathematics Calendar
8 IMA Tutorial: Robustness and the Internet: Design, Evolution,
and Theoretical Foundations, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota. (Apr. 2003, p. 499)
9-1 3 IMA Workshop 5: Robustness in Complex Systems, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota. (Apr. 2003, p. 499)

March 2004
;', 1-26 Markov Chain Monte Carlo: Innovations and Applications in
Statistics, Physics, and Bioinformatics, Institute for Mathematical
Sciences, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
Description: The purpose of this program is to bring together
people who work on innovative developments and applications
in statistics, physics, and bioinformatics. The program aims to
encourage cross-fertilization between workers in rather different
developments and also to challenge the theoretical capacity of
these methods by exposing them to statistical and bioinformatical
applications.
Organizing Committee: W. Kendall, chair (Univ. of Warwick, UK);
F. Liang, co-chair (National Univ. of Singapore and Texas A&M Univ.,
USA) and J.-S. Wang, co-chair (National Univ. of Singapore).
Format: The program will be comprised of a tutorial (March 1-5,
2004) on background material and a workshop (March 22-26,
2004) at the research level, in addition to seminars and informal
discussions.
Registration: Registration forms for the tutorial/workshop are
available athttp://www.ims.nus.edu.sg/Programs/mcmc/index.
htm and should be received at least one month before commencement of each activity. Registration is free. Membership is not
required for participation.
Membership: Membership application for visiting the institute
under the program is also available from the above website.
Members do not need to register for specific activities.
Contacts: For general enquiries, please email: ims@nus.edu.sg;
for enquiries on scientific aspects of the program, please email
W. Kendall, w. s .kendall@warwick.ac.uk; F. Liang, email: fliang@
stat. tamu. edu; and J.-S. Wang, email: cscwjs@nus.edu.sg.
Information: For more information please visit: http://www . ims.
nus.edu.sg/Programs/mcmc/index.htm.
7 IMA Tutorial: Control and Pricing in Communication and
Power Networks, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
(Apr. 2003, p. 499)
8-1 31MA Workshop 6: Control and Pricing in Communication and
Power Networks, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
(Apr. 2003, p. 499)
8-June 11 Proteom ics, Institute for Pure and Applied Mathematics,
UCLA, Los Angeles, California.
12-1 3 AMS Southeastern Section Meeting, Florida State Univ.,
Tallahassee, Florida. (Dec. 2002, p. 1001)

17-18 AMS Eastern Section Meeting, Rider Univ., Lawrenceville,
New Jersey. (Sept. 2002, p. 1001)
;'; 19-24 CHT-04: Advances in Computational Heat Transfer, Cruise
ship between Kirkenes and Bergen, Norway.
Objective: To provide a forum for the exposure and exchange of
ideas, methods, and results in computational heat transfer. Papers
on all aspects of computational heat transfer, both fundamental
and applied, will be welcome.
Program: The program will comprise contributed papers, all of
which will be poster presentations; nine invited keynote lectures, all
presented as stand-up lectures; a panel discussion on "Validation
and Verification of Computational Solutions" (with invit"ed participants plus open discussion from the floor); and a minisymposium
on "Computational Combustion" (with invited speakers).
Deadline: For extended (3-4 page) abstracts: September 1, 2003.
Information: http://cht04.mech.unsw . edu. au/.

#'

;', 22-25 2004 ASl Spring Meeting (with APA), Chicago, Illinois.
Description: This meeting will be held jointly with the Annual
Meeting of the Central Division of the American Philosophical
Association.
Program Committee: S. Awodey, T. Bays, and M. Kremer (chair).
Information: Visit http://www . aslonline . org/.

May 2004
3-7 IMA Workshop 8: Model Implementation, Algorithms and
Software Issues, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
(Apr. 2003, p. 499)
19-242004ASlAnnual Meeting,CarnegieMellonUniv.,Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania. (Dec. 2002, p. 1422)
24-2 81MA Workshop 9: Financial DataAnalysis and Applications,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota. (Apr. 2003, p. 499)

The following new announcements will not be repeated until
the criteria in the next to the last paragraph at the bottom of
the first page of this section are met.

July 2004
;', 25-31 2004 ASL European Summer Meeting (Logic Colloquium
'04), Torino, Italy.
Program Committee: T. Arai, D. DeJohgh, W. Goldfarb, G. Hjorth,
S. Lempp, G. Lolli, D. Marker, D. Martin, R. McKenzie, W. Pohlers
(Chair), W. Sieg, A. Sorbi, and A. Wilkie.
local Organizing Committee: A. Andretta (Chair), S. Berardi, R.
Camerlo, U. De Liguoro, M. Dezani, A. Marcone, N. Olivetti, and D.
Zambella.
Information: http://lc2004 .unito. i t/.

26-27 AMS Central Section Meeting, Ohio Univ., Athens, Ohio.
(Dec. 2002,p. 1001)
29-April 2 IMA Short Course: Tools for Modeling and Data Analysis in Finance/Asset Pricing, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
Minnesota. (Apr. 2003, p. 499)

April 2004
3-4 AMS Western Section Meeting, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California. (May 2003, p. 604)
;', 4-7 Fractal 2004, Vancouver, Canada.
Topics: "Complexity and Fractals in Nature". 8th International
Multidisciplinary Conference.
Information: http://www.kingston.ac .uk/fractal/.
12-16 IMA Workshop 7: Risk Management and Model Specifications Issues in Finance, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
Minnesota. (Apr. 2003, p. 499)
JUNE/JULY 2003

NOTICES OF THE AMS

725

New Publications
Offered by the AMS
Advances in Algebra
and Geometry

Algebra and Algebraic
Geometry
Chirurgie des
grassmanniennes
L. Lafforgue, Institut des
Chirurgie des
grassmanniennes

Hautes Etudes Scienti{iques,
Bures-sur-Yvette, France

The AMS now makes available this
succinct and quite elegant research
monograph written by Fields Medalist
\@
and eminent researcher, Laurent
Lafforgue. The material is an
outgrowth of Lafforgue's lectures and seminar at the Centre
de Recherches Mathematiques (University of Montreal, PQ,
Canada), where he held the 2001-2002 Aisenstadt Chair.
L. Lafforgue

American MathemaUcal Society

In the book, he addresses an important recurrent theme of
modern mathematics: the various compactifications of moduli
spaces, which have a large number of applications. This book
treats the case of ~hin Schubert varieties, which are natural
subvarieties of Grassmannians. He was led to these questions
by a particular case linked to his work on the Langlands
program. In this monograph, he develops the theory in a more
systematic way, which exhibits strong similarities with the
case of moduli of stable curves.
Prerequisites are minimal and include basic algebraic geometry, and standard facts about Grassmann varieties, their
Plucker embeddings, and toric varieties. The book is suitable
for advanced graduate students and research mathematicians
interested in the classification of moduli spaces.
Contents: Cellules de Schubert minces et espaces de configurations de matroldes; Compactifications: Pavages de convexes
entiers et recollement des cellules de Schubert minces; Etude
de quelques familIes simples de compactifications; Le fibre
equivariant universel sur la variete torique des facettes des
pavages; Variations de varietes projectives rationneles avec
structures logarithmiques; References bibliographiques.

c. Musili, University of
Hyderabad, India
This book presents 12 papers from
the International Conference on
Algebra and Geometry. This was the
fourth annual and first international
meeting ,of the Commutative Algebraists and Algebraic Geometers in
India (CAAG)'. Included are surveys,
expositions, and other research presentations on algebra, algebraic geometry, noncommutative geometry, computational
algebraic geometry, and related topics by leading mathematicians worldwide.
The book is intended for graduate students and researchers
interested in algebra and geometry.
A publication of the Hindustan Book Agency. Distributed exclusively by
the American Mathematical Society in North America and worldwide on
the AMS Bookstore.

Contents: Algebra: A. Conca, Products of ideals with linear
resolution; A. K. Dutta, Some results on affine fibrations;
J. Herzog, Koszul algebras and modules; A. V. Jayanthan and
J. K. Verma, Local cohomology modules of bigraded Rees algebras; M. Ojanguren and R. Parimala, Quadratic forms over
complete local rings; A. Ram, Representations of rank two
affine Hecke algebras; H. Srinivasan, Gorenstein sequences;
V. Suresh, The u-invariant of the function fields of p-adic
curves; Geometry: S. S. Abhyankar, Geometry and Galois
theory; V. Balaji, Semistable principal bundles; S. D. Cutkosky,
Ramification of valuations and singularities; F. J. Gallego and
B. P. Purnaprajna, Homogeneous rings associated to finite
morphisms.
Hindustan Book Agency
February 2003, 309 pages, Hardcover, ISBN 81-85931-36-4,
2000 Mathematics Subject Classification: 13-06, 14-06, 16-06,
17-06, 20-06, 51-06, 68-06, All AMS members $38, List $48,
Order code HIN/10N

CRM Monograph Series, Volume 19
April 2003, 170 pages, Hardcover, ISBN 0-8218-3358-8,
LC 2003045105, 2000 Mathematics Subject Classification:
14N20, 52B40, 14M15, 15A75, 14M25, 14D20, All AMS
members $36, List $45, Order code CRMM/19N

726

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

New Publications Offered by the AMS

The Congruence
Subgroup Problem

Analysis

B. Sury, Indian Statistical
Institute, Bangalore
This is an elementary introduction to
the congruence subgroup problem, a
problem that deals with number-theoretic properties of groups defined
arithmetically. The novelty and,
indeed, the goal of this book is to
present some applications to group theory, as well as to
number theory, that have emerged in the last fifteen years.

Dynamics of Topologically
Generic Homeomorphisms
Ethan Akin

Mike Hurley
Judy A. Kennedy

wN.Kt%f..av~~w_.
AmerIcan Mathematical Society

No knowledge of algebraic groups is assumed, and the choice
of the examples discussed seeks to convey that even these
special cases give interesting applications.
After the background material in group theory and number
theory, solvable groups are treated first, and some generalizations are presented using class field theory. Then the group
SL(n) over rings of S-integers is studied. The methods
involved are very different from the ones employed for solvable groups. Group-theoretic properties, such as presentations
and central extensions, are extensively used. Several proofs,
which appeared after the original ones, are discussed.
The last chapter has a survey of the status of the congruence
subgroup problem for general algebraic groups. Only outlines
of proofs are given here, and with a sufficient understanding
of algebraic groups, the proofs can be completed.
The book is intended for beginning graduate students. Many
exercises are given.

Reserve University, Cleveland,

OH, and Judy A. Kennedy,
Contents: Introduction; Attractors and chain recurrence; Periodic decompositions and adding machines; Sernicontinuity
and homogeneity; Crushing arguments; Topological horseshoes; Generic homeomorphisms; Almost equicontinuity;
Cantor sets; The circle; Crushing the chain recurrent set;
Generic homeomorphisms on manifolds; Generic mappings on
manifolds; Bibliography; Index.
Memoirs of the American Mathematical Society, Volume 164,
Number 783
July 2003, 130 pages, Softcover, ISBN 0-8218-3338-3,
LC 2003048026, 2000 Mathematics Subject Classification:
37B99, Individual member $32, List $53, Institutional
member $42, Order code MEMO/164/783N

MEM9 IRS
American Mathematical Society

Contents: A review of some basic notions; Congruence
subgroups in solvable groups; SL2- The negative solutions;
SIn (Os) -The positive cases of CSP; Applications of the CSP;
CSP in general algebraic groups; Appendix: Moor's local
uniqueness theorem.

Anisotropic Hardy
Spaces and Wavelets
Marcin Bownik, University of

Anisotropic Hardy
Spaces and Wavelets
Marcin Bownik

Hindustan Book Agency

JUNE/JULY 2003

Ethan Akin, City College of
New York (CUNY),
Mike Hurley, Case Western

University of Delaware, Newark

A publication of the Hindustan Book Agency. Distributed exclusively by
the American Mathematical Society in North America and worldwide on
the AMS Bookstore.

March 2003, 301 pages, Hardcover, ISBN 81-85931-38-0,
2000 Mathematics Subject Classification: 11F06, 20G30, 20HOS,
All AMS members $38, List $48, Order code HIN/12N

Dynamics of
Topologically
Generic
Homeomorphisms

li~~~~.WWE

Michigan, Ann Arbor
Contents: Anisotropic Hardy spaces;
Wavelets; Notation index; Bibliography.
Memoirs of the American Mathematical Society, Volume 164, Number 781

ArnericnnMnthemnhcnlSoclcty

July 2003, 122 pages, Softcover,
ISBN 0-8218-3326-X, LC 2003048023,
2000 Mathematics Subject Classification: 42B30, 42C40; 42B20,
42B25, Individual member $32, List $53, Institutional
member $42, Order code MEMO/164/781N

I

NOTICES OF THE AMS

727

New Publications Offered by the AMS

Operator Theory and
Banach Algebras

Riemann Surfaces of
Infinite Genus

M. Chidami, University of
Rabat, Morocco, R. Curto,

Joel Feldman, University of

University of Iowa, Iowa City,
M. Mbekhta, University of Lille,
France, F.-H. Vasilescu,
University of Lille I, France, and
J. Zemanek, Institute of
Mathematics, Warsaw, Editors
A publication of the Theta Foundation.
This volume contains the proceedings of the International
Conference on Operator Theory and Banach Algebras. Over 70
participants from the world over attended. The book contains
14 selected refereed papers; three are written in English and
the rest in French. Half are survey papers referring to
different domains; the remaining papers contain original
results with complete proofs.

Riemann Surfaces
of Infinite Genus
Joel Feldman
Horst Knorrer
Eugene Trubowitz

t~AIllCr1CnnMaUlcmnUCnISoclclY

British Columbia, Vancouver,
Canada, and Horst Knorrer

and Eugene Trubowitz,
Eidgenossische Technische
Hochschule, Zurich,
Switzerland

In this book, the authors geometrically
construct Riemann surfaces of infinite genus by pasting
together plane domains and handles. To achieve a meaningful
generalization of the classical theory of Riemann surfaces to
the case of infinite genus, one must impose restrictions on the
asymptotic behavior of the Riemann surface. In the construction carried out here, these restrictions are formulated in
terms of the sizes and locations of the handles and in terms
of the glUing maps.

All papers have been revised to account for recent developments. Overall, they present an accurate overview of the
domains considered.

The approach used has two main attractions. The first is that
much of the classical theory of Riemann surfaces, including
the Torelli theorem, can be generalized to this class. The
second is that solutions of Kadomcev-Petviashvilli equations
can be expressed in terms of theta functions associated with
Riemann surfaces of infinite genus constructed in the book.
Both of these are developed here. The authors also present in
detail a number of important examples of Riemann surfaces
of infinite genus (hyperelliptic surfaces of infinite genus, heat
surfaces and Fermi surfaces).

A publication of the Theta Foundation. Distributed worldwide, except
in Romania, by the AMS.

The book is suitable for graduate students and research mathematicians interested in analysis and integrable systems.

Contents: P. Aiena and M. Gonzalez, Improjective operators
which are not inessential; M. Akkar, R. A. Hassani, and
A. Blali, C-semi-groupes (X-integres affilies a des algebres
d'operateurs; B. Aupetit, E. Makai, M. Mbekhta, and
J. Zemanek, The connected components of the idempotents in
the Calkin algebra and their liftings; F. Bagarello, Quantum
models and locally convex -algebras; M. Cabrera and
A. A. Mohammed, Algebra of quotients with bounded evaluation of a normed prime algebra; G. Cassier, Autour de
quelques interactions recentes entre l' analyse complexe et la
theorie des operateurs; R. E. Curto and W. Y. Lee, Subnormality
and k-hyponormality of Toeplitz operators: A brief survey and
open questions; K. B. Laursen, (8)ecomposa(l3)ility;
L. W. Marcoux, A survey of (U + K)-orbits; A. Micali, Sur les
algebres de Banach-Bernstein; M. M. Neumann, Intertwining
restrictions and quotients of decomposable operators;
A. R. Sourour, The Lie structure of certain algebras of operators; C. Trapani, CQ * -algebras of operators: Density
properties; F.-H. Vasilescu, Extensions of unbounded
symmetric multioperators.

This item will also be of interest to those working in differential
equations.

The main topics covered are the spectral theory of operators
on a Banach space, classes of topological algebras with applications to physics, different classes of operators on Hilbert
and Banach space, problems in Banach algebras, Lie algebras
of operators, interaction between complex analysis and operator theory, and semigroups of operators.

*

International Book Series of Mathematical Texts

Contents: L 2- cohomology, exhaustions with finite charge and
theta series; The Torelli Theorem; Examples; The
Kadomcev-Petviashvilli equation; Bibliography.
CRM Monograph Series, Volume 20
June 2003, 296 pages, Hardcover, ISBN 0-8218-3357-X,
LC 2003045110, 2000 Mathematics Subject Classification:
30F99, All AMS members $63, List $79, Order code
CRMM/20N

Function Spaces
Krzysztof Jarosz, Southern

Function

Spaces

Illinois University, Edwardsville,

Editor

This volume presents papers from the
Fourth Conference on Function Spaces.
The conference brought together mathematicians interested in various
problems within the general area of
function spaces, allowing for discussion and exchange of ideas on those
problems and related questions.
Krzysztof Jarosz
Editor

March 2003, 166 pages, Softcover, ISBN 973-85432-1-5,2000
Mathematics Subject Classification: 47-XX, All AMS members
$22, List $28, Order code THETA/3N

e

The lectures covered a broad range of topics, including spaces
and algebras of analytic functions of one and of many variables (and operators on such spaces), LP -spaces, spaces of

728

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME SO, NUMBER 6

New Publications Offered by the AMS
Banach-valued functions, isometries of function spaces, geometry of Banach spaces, and related subjects.
Included are 26 articles written by leading experts. Known
results, open problems, and new discoveries are featured.
Most papers are written for nonexperts, so the book can serve
as a good introduction to the material presented.
Contents: P. Aiena and F. Villafaiie, Components of resolvent
sets and local spectral theory; J. R. Akeroyd, The Fejer-Riesz
inequality and the index of the shift; j. T. Anderson and
J. Wenner, A Cauchy-Green formula on the unit sphere in C2 ;
H. Arizmendi, A. Carrillo, and L. Palacios, On (){ -dual algebras;
R. M. Aron and M. Maestre, A connected metric space that is
not separably connected; P. Bandyopadhyay and S. Dutta,
Weighted Chebyshev centres and intersection properties of balls
in Banach spaces; P. Beneker and J. Wiegerlnck, The boundary
of the unit ball in HI_type spaces; D. P. Blecher and D. M. Hay,
Complete isometries - an illustration of noncommutative functional analysis; K. Boulabiar, G. Buskes, and A. Triki, Some
recent trends and advances in certain lattice ordered algebras;
E. Briem, An extension of a theorem of Wermer, Bernard, Sidney
and Hatori to algebras of functions on locally compact spaces;
Q. Bu, Some mapping properties of p-summing operators with
Hilbertian domain; A. Curnock, J. Howroyd, and N.-C. Wong,
The unique decomposition property and the Banach-Stone
theorem; T. Dawson, A survey of algebraic extensions of
commutative, unital normed algebras; P. N. Dowling,
C. J. Lennard, and B. Turett, Some more examples of subsets of
Co and L I [0, 1] failing the fixed point property; P. Gorkin,
R. Mortini, and D. Suarez, Homotopic composition operators on
H (Bn ) ; j. j. Grobler and M. De Kock, Characterization of
conditional expectation in terms of positive projections;
M. Haralampidou, The Krull nature of locally C* -algebras;
o. Hatori, T. Ishii, T. Miura, and S.-E. Takahasi, Characterizations and automatic linearity for ring homomorphisms on
algebras of functions; H. Jarchow and U. Kollbrunner, Carleson
embeddings for weighted Bergman spaces; K. Jarosz and
T. S. S. R. K. Rao, Weak*-extreme points of injective tensor
product spaces; K.-T. Kim and S. G. Krantz, Determining sets
and fixed points for holomorphic endomorphisms; T. L. Miller,
v. G. Miller, and M. M. Neumann, Localization in the spectral
theory of operators on Banach spaces; V. Runde, Abstract
harmonic analysis, homological algebra, and operator spaces;
D. Shennan, Relative tensor products for modules over von
Neumann algebras; S. j. Sidney, Uniform algebras generated by
unimodular functions; T. Tonev and S. A. Grigoryan, Analytic
functions on compact groups and their applications to almost
periodic functions.

MEIYl9 IRS
Amencan Mathematical Society

guasianalytic Monogenic
Solutions of a
Cohomological Equation
S. Manni

D. Sauzin

Amencan MathematIcal SocIety

Quasianalytic
Monogenic Solutions
of a Cohomological
Equation
s. Marmi, University of Udine,
Italy, and D. Sauzin,
Astronomie et Systems
Dynamiques, Paris

This item will also be of interest to
those working in differential equations.
Contents: Introduction; Monogenic properties of the solutions
of the cohomological equation; Carleman classes at diophantine points; Resummation at resonances and constant-type
points; Conclusions and applications; Appendix; Bibliography.
Memoirs of the American Mathematical Society, Volume 164,
Number 780
July 2003,83 pages, Softcover, ISBN 0-8218-3325-1,
LC 2003048024, 2000 Mathematics Subject Classification:
37F50, 30D60, 30G30, 11A55, 11J06, 40G10, 34M37,
Individual member $29, List $49, Institutional member $39,
Order code MEMO/164/780N

Applications

OO

Contemporary Mathematics, Volume 328
June 2003, 322 pages, Softcover, ISBN 0-8218-3269-7,
LC 2003045306, 2000 Mathematics Subject Classification:
32H02, 46E25, 46H05, 46J10, 46J15, 46L07, 47AIO, 47B38,
47L10, 54D05, All AMS members $63, List $79, Order code
CONM/328N

Introduction to Game
.Theory
Stef Tijs, Tilburg University,
Netherlands
This book is an introductory graduatelevel text on game theory that grew
out of courses in mathematics and
economics and operations research.
Game theory deals with mathematical
models of conflict and cooperation. In
the first nine chapters, the author covers noncooperative
games in extensive and strategic form and some economic
applications. Relations with the theory of linear programing
and the theory of linear complementarity are indicated.
The last chapter treats different types of cooperative games
and solution concepts. Discussed are economic applications
and applications in OR-situations with multiple agents.
The book includes a rich collection of exercises, partly with
solutions.
A publication of the Hindustan Book Agency. Distributed exclusively by
the American Mathematical Society in North America and worldwide on
the AMS Bookstore.

Contents: Introduction; Games in strategic form; Two-person
zero-sum games; Mixed extensions of bimatrix games; The
Nash equilibria of a 3-person game; Linear programming and
matrix games; Linear complementarity and bimatrix games;
Potential games; Other topics in non-cooperative game theory;
Games in coalitional form; The imputation set and the core;
Linear production games; Dominance, the D-core and stable
sets; The Shapley value; The T -value; The nucleolus;
JUNE/JULY 2003

NOTICES OF THE AMS'

729

New Publications Offered by the AMS
Bargaining games; NTU-games; The NTU-value; Solutions of
exercises; Extra exercises; Bibliography; Index.
Hindustan Book Agency

Discrete Mathematics and
Combinatorics

March 2003, 176 pages, Hardcover, ISBN 81-85931-37-2,
2000 Mathematics Subject Classification: 91Axx, All AMS
members $24, List $30, Order code HIN/13N

Asymptotic
Representation
Theory of the
Symmetric Group
and its Applications
in Analysis
s. v. Kerov

Computational
Geometry
Lectures at the
Morningside Center of
Mathelllatics
Ren-Hong Wang, Dalian
University of Technology, PRe,

Editor
Computational geometry is a borderline subject related to pure and applied mathematics,
computer science, and engineering. The book contains articles
on various topics in computational geometry based on invited
lectures and contributed papers presented during the program
on computational geometry at the Morningside Center of
Mathematics at the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Beijing).
The opening article by R.-H. Wang gives a nice survey of
various aspects of computational geometry, many of which are
discussed in detail in the volume. Topics of the other articles
include problems of optimal triangulation, splines, data interpolation, problems of curve and surface design, problems of
shape control, quantum teleportation, and more.
The book is suitable for graduate students and researchers
interested in computational geometry and specialists in theoretical computer science.
Titles in this series are copublished with International Press,
Cambridge, MA.

Contents: R.-H. Wang, On computational geometry;
B. A. Barsky, Geometry for analysis of corneal shape; C. Falai,
Approximate implicitization of rational surfaces; H. Du, A
geometric approach to dimSi(L~Ms); N. Dyn, S. Hed, and
D. Levin, Subdivision for Cl surface interpolation; G. Farin
and D. Hansford, A permanence principle for shape control;
G. Feng, T. Wu, K. Yu, S. Zhang, and Y. Zhou, Blending several
implicit algebraic surfaces with ruled surfaces; G. Nurnberger
and F. Zeilfelder, Lagrange interpolation by splines on triangulations; E. Binz and W. Schempp, Quantum teleportation and
spin echo: A unitary symplectic spinor approach; X. Shi and
R.-H. Wang, The generalization of Pascal's theorem and
Morgan-Scott's partition; C. R. Traas, 'Optimal' triangulation of
surfaces and bodies; R.-H. Wang, Multivariate spline and
geometry; Z. Wu, Geometric continuous B-spline-A generalization of the approach of )I-spline; G. Xu, Adaptive and smooth
surface construction by triangular A-patches; G. Zhao and
R.-H. Wang, A B-spline function in s~ (R3 , ~~) .
AMS/IP Studies in Advanced Mathematics, Volume 34
July 2003, 235 pages, Softcover, ISBN 0-8218-2044-3,
LC 2003045381, 2000 Mathematics Subject Classification:
35-02, 35l67; 35L60, 35L80, 76N10,46N20,AlIAMS
members $47, List $59, Order code AMSIP/34N

730

This book reproduces the doctoral
thesis written by a remarkable mathematician, Sergei V. Kerov. His untimely death at age 54 left the
mathematical community with an extensive body of work and
this one-of-a-kind monograph. In it, he gives a clear and lucid
account of results and methods of asymptotic representation
theory. The book is a unique source of information on an
important topic of current research.
Asymptotic representation theory of symmetric groups deals
with problems of two types: asymptotic properties of representations of symmetric groups of large order and
representations of the limiting object, i.e., the infinite
symmetric group. The author contributed significantly in the
development of both directions. His book presents an account
of these contributions, as well as those of other researchers.
Among the problems of the first type, the author discusses
the properties of the distribution of the normalized cycle
length in a random permutation and the limiting shape of a
random (with respect to the Plancherel measure) Young
diagram. He also studies stochastic properties of the deviations of random diagrams from the limiting curve.
Among the problems of the second type, Kerov studies the
important problem of computing irreducible characters of the
infinite symmetric group. This leads to the study of a continuous analog of the notion of Young diagram, and in particular,
to a continuous analogue of the hook walk algorithm, which is
well known in the combinatorics of finite Young diagrams. In
turn, this construction provides a completely new description
of the relation between the classical moment problems of
Hausdorff and Markov.
The book is suitable for graduate students and research mathematicians interested in representation theory and
combinatorics.
This item will also be of interest to those working in probability
and algebra and algebraic geometry.
Contents: Introduction; Boundaries and dimension groups of
certain graphs; The boundary of the Young graph and
MacDonald polynomials; The Plancherel measure of the
symmetric group; Young diagrams in problems of analysis;
References; Comments on Kerov's thesis by G. Olshanski;
Additional references.
Translations of Mathematical Monographs, Volume 219
July 2003, 201 pages, Hardcover, ISBN 0-8218-3440-1,
LC 2003049556, 2000 Mathematics Subject Classification:
20C30, 20P05, 22D10, All AMS members $68, List $85, Order
code MMONO/219N

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

New Publications Offered by the AMS
quantity: Foundations of analysis, 1860-1910; T. Archibald,
Differential equations: A historical overview to circa 1900;
C. Fraser, The calculus of variations: A historical survey;
R. Siegmund-Schultze, The origins of functional analysis;
Index of names; Subject index.

General and
Interdisciplinary
Supplementary Reading

A History of .
Analysis
Hans Niels Jahnke, University
of Essen, Germany, Editor

History of Mathematics, Volume 24
August 2003, approximately 432 pages, Hardcover, ISBN 08218-2623-9, LC 2003041836, 2000 Mathematics Subject
Classification: 01AOS, 26-03, 28-03, 30-03, 31-03, 33-03,
34-03, 35-03,40-03,45-03,49-03, All AMS members $71,
List $89, Order code HMATH/24N

Analysis as an independent subject
was created as part of the scientific
revolution in the seventeenth century.
Kepler, Galileo, Descartes, Fermat,
Huygens, Newton, and Leibniz, to
name but a few, contributed to its
genesis. Since the end of the seventeenth century, the historical progress of mathematical
analysis has displayed unique vitality and momentum. No
other mathematical field has so profoundly influenced the
development of modern scientific thinking.
Describing this multidimensional historical development
requires an in-depth discussion which includes a reconstruction of general trends and an examination of the specific
problems. This volume is designed as a collective work of
authors who are proven experts in the history of mathematics.
It clarifies the conceptual change that analysis underwent
during its development while elucidating the influence of
specific applications and describing the relevance of biographical and philosophical backgrounds.
The first ten chapters of the book outline chronological development and the last three chapters survey the history of
differential equations, the calculus of variations, and functional analysis.
Special features are a separate chapter on the development of
the theory of complex functions in the' nineteenth century and
two chapters on the influence of physics on analysis. One is
about the origins of analytical mechanics, and one treats the
development of boundary-value problems of mathematical
physics (especially potential theory) in the nineteenth century.
The book presents an accurate and very readable account of
the history of analysis. Each chapter provides a comprehensive
bibliography. Mathematical examples have been carefully
chosen so that readers with a modest background in mathematics can follow them. It is suitable for mathematical
historians and a general mathematical audience.

This item will also be of interest to those working in analysis.
Copublished with the London Mathematical Society. Members of the
LMS may order directly from the AMS at the AMS member price. The
LMS is registered with the Charity Commissioners.

Contents: R. Thiele, Antiquity; J. van Maanen, Precursors of
differentiation and integration; N. Guicciardini, Newton's
method and Leibniz's calculus; H. N. Jahnke, Algebraic
analysis in the 18th century; M. Panza, The origins of analytic
mechanics in the 18th century; J. Liitzen, The foundation of
analysis in the 19th century; T. Archibald, Analysis and
physics in the nineteenth· century: The case of boundary-value
problems; U. Bottazzini, Complex function theory, 1780-1900;
T. Hochkirchen, Theory of measure and integration from
Riemann to Lebesgue; M. Epple, The end of the science of

JUNE/JULY 2003

MASS Selecta
Teaching and Learning
Advanced
Undergraduate
Mathematics
Svetlana Katok, Alexei
Sossinsky, and Serge
Tabachnikov, Pennsylvania
State University, University
Park, Editors
This book results from a unique and innovative program at
Pennsylvania State University. Under the program, the "best of
the best" students nationwide are chosen to study challenging
mathematical areas under the guidance of experienced mathematicians. This program, Mathematics Advanced Study
Semesters (MASS), offers an unparalleled opportunity for
talented undergraduate students who are serious in the
pursuit of mathematical knowledge.
This volume represents various aspects of the MASS program
over its six-year existence, "including core courses, summer
courses, students' research, and colloqUium talks. The book is
most appropriate for college professors of mathematics who
work with bright and eager undergraduate and beginning
graduate students, for such students who want to expand
their mathematical horizons, and for everyone who loves
mathematics and wants to Jearn more interesting and unusual
material.
The first half of the book contains lecture notes of nonstandard courses. A text for a semester-long course on p-adic
analysis is centered around contrasts and similarities with its
real counterpart. A shorter text focuses on a classical area of
interplay between geometry, algebra and number theory
(continued fractions, hyperbolic geometry and quadratic
forms). Also provided are detailed descriptions of two innovative courses, one on geometry and the other on classical
mechanics. These notes constitute what one may call the
skeleton of a course, leaving the instructor ample room for
innovation arid improvisation.
The second half of the book contains a large collection of
essays on a broad spectrum of exciting topics from Hilbert's
Fourth Problem to geometric inequalities and minimal
surfaces, from mathematical billiards to fractals and tilings,
from unprovable theorems to the classification of finite simple
groups and lexicographic codes.
Contents: S. Katok and S. Tabachnikov, A brief descrjption of
MASS program; G. E. Andrews, Teaching in the MASS program;

NOTICES OF THE AMS

731

New Publications Offered by the AMS
Lecture notes: s. Katok, p-adic analysis in comparison with
real; M. Levi, Geometrical methods of mechanics; A. Katok,
Geometric structures, symmetry and elements of Lie groups;
S. Katok, Continued fractions, hyperbolic geometry and
quadratic forms; MASS colloquium: S. Tabachnikov, MASS
colloquium; J. C. Alvarez Paiva, Hilbert's fourth problem in
two dimensions; J. Conway, Integral lexicographic codes;
E. Formanek, The classification of finite simple groups;
G. Galperin, Billiard balls count rr; V. Nitica, Rep-tiles revisited; Y. Pesin, Fractals and dynamics; S. G. Simpson,
Unprovable theorems and fast-growing functions;
A. B. Sossinsky, Minimal surfaces and random walks;
S. Tabachnikov, The tale of a geometric inequality; Student
research papers: M. Guysinsky, Summer REU program at Penn
State; S. Chuba, Partitions of n and connected triangles;
J. Kantor and M. Maydanskiy, Triangles gone wild;
A. Medvedev, Determinacy of games; J. Voight, On the nonexistence of odd perfect numbers; Appendices: S. Katok,
A. Sossinsky, and S. Tabachnikov, MASS courses and instructors; S. Katok, A. Sossinsky, and S. Tabachnikov, MASS
colloquia; S. Katok, A. Sossinsky, and S. Tabachnikov, MASS
participants.
June 2003, 313 pages, Hardcover, ISBN 0-8218-3363-4,
LC 2003045185, 2000 Mathematics Subject Classification:
00-01, 00-02, All AMS members $47, List $59, Order code
MASSN
Recommended Reading

Contents: Getting ready for graduate school: Heading off to
graduate school; Preliminaries; Essentrial elements of a graduate education: Pre-thesis work; Thesis work; Sticky wickets:
Practical difficulties; Moral difficulties; Post-graduate-school
existence: Life after the thesis; Afterthoughts; The elements of
mathematics: Mathematics I need to know; Glossary; The
administrative structure of a mathematics department and a
university; The academic ranks; The academic composition of
a mathematics department; A checklist for graduate school;
Bibliography; Index.
August 2003, approximately 240 pages, Softcover, ISBN 08218-3455-X, 2000 Mathematics Subject ClaSSification: 00-01,
All AMS members $22, List $28, Order code GSCMN

Geometry and Topology
RIGIDITE. GROUPE FONDAMENTAL
ET DYNAMIQUE
Martine Bablllat. Renata Feres.
Abdelghani Zeghib
avec la coUaboration d'Emmanuel Breuillard
edlle par Patrick FouJon

.~
Panoramas et Syntheses

Survival Guide

University, St. Louis, MO
With graduate school, young mathematicians take the first step toward a
career in mathematics. During this period, they make important decisions that will affect the rest of their careers. Here
now is a detailed guide to help students navigate those years
and the years that follow.
In his inimitable and forthright style, Steven Krantz addresses

the major issues of graduate school, including deciding where to
go, passing the qualifying exams, finding an advisor, writing a
thesis, and getting that first job. As with his earlier guide, How to
Teach Mathematics, Krantz avoids generalities, giving clear
advice on how to handle real situations. In addition, he includes
a description of the basic elements of a mathematical education,
as well as three appendices on the structure of a typical department and university and the standard academic ranks.
Steven G. Krantz is an experienced mathematician and an
award-winning author. He has worked in many different types
of mathematics departments, supervised both masters and
doctoral students, and is currently the Chair of the Mathematics Department at Washington University in St. Louis.
Other AMS titles by Steven Krantz are A Primer of Mathematical Writing and Techniques of Problem Solving.

732

d'Orleans, France,

Renato Feres, Washington
University, St Louis, MO, and
Recherche Mathematique
Avancee, CNRS, Strasbourg,
France

A Mathematician's

Steven G. Krantz, Washington

Martine Babillot, Universite

Abdelghani Zeghib, Institut de

Supplementary Reading

Graduate School and
Early Career
Development

Rigidite, groupe
fondamental et
dynamique

This volume presents recent progress in the domain of
geometric structures and group actions. M. Babillot shows the
contribution of dynamics and ergodic theory in the analysis of
the quantitative version of the Oppenheim conjecture or for
discrete nonelementary isometry groups of noncompact manifolds with negative curvature. R. Feres introduces Gromov's
approach to rigid geometric structures, gives various Zimmertype super-rigidity results, and presents a very nice theorem
of Gromov concerning the fundamental group of analytic
manifolds equipped with a unimodular A -rigid structure. A.
Zeghib demonstrates how a clever use of partially algebraic
sets and of control theory leads to a new simple proof of the
dense-open orbit theorem.
'
A publication of the Societe Mathematique de France. Distributed by
the AMS in North America. Orders from other countries should be sent
to the SMF, Maison de la SMF, B.P. 67, 13274 Marseille cedex 09, France,
or to Institut Henri Poincare, 11 rue Pierre et Marie Curie, 75231 Paris
cedex OS, France. Members of the SMF receive a 30% discount from list.

Contents: M. Babillot, Points entiers et groupes discrets: de
l'analyse aux systemes dynamiques; R. Feres, Rigid geometric
structures and actions of semisimple Lie groups; A. Zeghib,
Sur les groupes de transformations rigides: theoreme de l' orbite dense-ouverte.
Panoramas et Syntheses, Number 13
February 2003, 188 pages, Softcover, ISBN 2-85629-134-1,
2000 Mathematics Subject Classification: 11F72, 11J25, 11P21,
14P99, 20H10, 22E40, 37A17, 37A25, 37A45, 37Cxx, 37D40,
51L99, 53Cxx, 58H99, 93A99, 20F67, 37C85,Individual
member $30, List $33, Order code PASY/13N

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

New Publications Offered by the AMS

LusternikSchnirelmann

Supplementary Reading

Foliations II

Category

Alberto Candel, California
State University, Northridge,

Octav Cornea, Universite de
Montreal, QC, Canada,
Gregory Lupton and
John Oprea, Cleveland State
University, OH, and Daniel
Tame, Universite de Lille,
France

and Lawrence Conlon,
Washington University,
St. Louis, MO
From reviews for Foliations I:

Overall presentation is first-rate ...
diagrams ... are well-crafted and
reflect the strongly "graphical" nature
of the subject ... A prospective reader who cares to invest the
time needed to plough seriously through the book ought to be
rewarded with a gratifying mathematical experience ... can
also be recommended to more advanced researchers, who
would enjoy seeing a compendium of major results.
-Bulletin of the LMS
The authors pay great attention to examples, and you can find
a large number of them in the book... They are well-chosen
and will keep the interest of the reader on a high level ... [The
book is] a fundamental source for everybody with a serious
interest in foliations.
-European Mathematical Society Newsletter
The large number of well-chosen examples is one of the most
striking features of the book ... [It] contains several beautiful
figures which help one to imagine and better understand situations described formally in the text. Therefore, graduate
students, young researchers, and in fact, everybody interested
in foliations should profit from this book.
-Mathematical Reviews
This is the second of two volumes on the qualitative theory of
foliations. For this volume, the authors have selected three
special topics: analysis on foliated spaces, characteristic
classes of foliations, and foliated manifolds. Each of these is
an example of deep interaction between foliation theory and
some other highly-developed area of mathematics. In all cases,
the authors present useful, in-depth introductions, which lead
to further study using the extensive available literature.
This comprehensive volume has something to offer a broad
spectrum of readers: from beginners to advanced students to
professional researchers. It contains exercises and many illustrations. The book would make an elegant supplementary text
for a topics course at the advanced graduate level. Foliations I is
Volume 23 in the AMS series, Graduate Studies in Mathematics.
Contents: Part 1: Analysis and geometry on foliated spaces: Foreword to part 1; The C* -algebra of a foliated space; Harmonic
measures for foliated spaces; Generic leaves; Part 2: Characteristic classes and foliations: Foreword to part 2; The Euler class of
circle bundles; The Chern-Well construction; Characteristic
classes and integrability; The Godbillon-Vey classes; Part 3: Foliated 3-manifolds: Foreword to part 3; Constructing foliations;
Reebless foliations; Foliations and the Thurston norm; Disk
decomposition and foliations of link complements; Appendices:
C* -Algebras; Riemannian geometry and heat diffusion;
Brownian motion; Planar foliations; Bibliography; Index.

Lusternik-Schnirelmann category is like a Picasso painting.
Looking at category from different perspectives produces
completely different impressions of category's beauty and
applicability.
-from the Introduction
Lusternik-Schnirelmann category is a subject with ties to both
algebraic topology and dynamical systems. The authors take
LS-category as the central theme, and then develop topics in
topology and dynamics around it. Included are exercises and
many examples. The book presents the material in a rich,
expository style.
The book provides a unified approach to LS-category,
including foundational material on homotopy theoretic
aspects, the Lusternik-Schnirelmann theorem on critical
points, and more advanced topics such as Hopf invariants, the
construction of functions with few critical points, connections
with symplectic geometry, the complexity of algorithms, and
category of 3-manifolds.
This is the first book to synthesize these topics. It takes
readers from the very basics of the subject to the state of the
art. Prerequisites are few: two semesters of algebraic topology
and, perhaps, differential topology. It is suitable for graduate
students and researchers interested in algebraic topology and
dynamical systems.
This item will also be of interest to those working in analysis.
Contents: Introduction to LS-category; Lower bounds for
LS-category; Upper bounds for category; Localization and category; Rational homotopy and category; Hopf invariants;
Category and critical points; Category and symplectic
topology; Examples, computations and extensions; Topology
and analysis; Basic homotopy; Bibliography; Index.
Mathematical Surveys and Monographs, Volume 103

July 2003, 330 pages, Hardcover, ISBN 0-8218-3404-5,
LC 2003048136, 2000 Mathematics Subject Classification:
55M30, 55P62, 55Q25, 57R17, 58E05, 37B30, 53D35; 53D12,
55P60, 37C99, All AMS members $67, List $84, Order code
SURVj103N

Graduate Studies in Mathematics, Volume 60

August 2003, approximately 560 pages, Hardcover,
ISBN 0-8218-0881-8, Le 99-045694, 2000 Mathematics Subject
Classification: 57R30, All AMS members $63, List $79,
Order code GSMj60N

JUNE/JULY 2003

NOTICES OF THE AMS

733

New Publications Offered by the AMS

MEM9 IRS
American MathematJeal Society

h- Principles
and Flexibility
in Geometry
Hansj6rg Geiges

American Mathematical SOCIety

h-Principles and
Flexibility in
Geometry
Hansjorg Geiges, University of
Cologne, Germany
Contents: Introduction; Differential
relations and h-principles; The h-principle for open, invariant relations;
Convex integration theory; Bibliography.

Memoirs of the American Mathematical Society, Volume 164,
Number 779
July 2003, 58 pages, Softcover, ISBN 0-8218-3315-4,
LC 2003048025, 2000 Mathematics Subject Classification:
53C23; 57R42, 53Dxx, Individual member $27, List $45,
Institutional member $36, Order code MEMO/164/779N

Mathematical Physics

Advances in Differential
Equations and
Mathematical Physics
Yulia Karpeshina
GOnter Stolz
RudiWeikard
YanniZeng
Editors

Advances in
Differential
Equations and
Mathematical Physics
Yulia Karpeshina, Gunter
Stolz, Rudi Weikard, and
Yanni Zeng, University of
Alabama, Birmingham, Editors

This volume presents the proceedings
of the 9th International Conference on Differential Equations
and Mathematical Physics. It contains 29 research and survey
papers contributed by conference participants. The conference
provided researchers a forum to present and discuss their
recent results in a broad range of areas encompassing the
theory of differential equations and their applications in mathematical physics.
Papers in this volume represent some of the most interesting
results and the major areas of research that were covered,
including spectral theory with applications to non-relativistic
and relativistic quantum mechanics, including time-dependent
and random potential, resonances, many body systems, pseudodifferential operators and quantum dynamics, inverse
spectral and scattering problems, the theory of linear and
nonlinear partial differential equations with applications in
fluid dynamics, conservation laws and numerical simulations,
as well as equilibrium and nonequilibrium statistical
mechanics.

theorem with applications to inverse spectral theory;
B. M. Brown and M. S. P. Eastham, Zero-free regions for Jost
functions: The Bessel case; G.-Q. Chen, Concentration in solutions to hyperbolic conservation laws; j.-M. Combes,
P. D. Hislop, and F. Klopp, Local and global continuity of the
integrated density of states; o. Costin, R. D. Costin, and
j. L. Lebowitz, Transition to the continuum of a particle in
time-periodic potentials; D. Damanik, Quantum dynamical
bounds for one-dimensional quasicrystals; D. Gioev, Lower
order terms in Szego theorems on Zoll manifolds; j. Glimm,
S. Hou, Y.-H. Lee, D. H. Sharp, and K. Ye, Solution error
models for uncertainty quantification; j. A. Goldstein and
I. Kombe, Instantaneous blow up; G. A. Hagedorn, Simplified
semiclassical propagation estimates; M. Hitrik and
I. Polterovich, Resolvent expansions -and trace regularizations
for Schrodinger operators; V. jaksic and C.-A. Pillet, A note
on the entropy production formula; V. Kostrykin,
K. A. Makarov, and A. K. Motovilov, Existence and uniqueness of solutions to the operator Riccati equation. A geometric
approach; P. Kuchment and H. Zeng, Asymptotics of spectra
of Neumann Laplacians in thin domains; A. Laptev and
O. Safronov, Absolutely continuous spectrum of matrix valued
Schrodinger operators; D. Lenz, Ergodic theory and discrete
one-dimensional random Schrodinger operators: Uniform existence of the Lyapunov exponent; E. H. Lieb and R. Seiringer,
Bose-Einstein condensation of dilute gases in traps;
B. Nachtergaele, W. L. Spitzer, and S. Starr, On the dynamics
of interfaces in the ferromagnetic XXZ chain under weak
perturbations; N. Pavlovic, Bounds for sums of powers of
eigenvalues of Schrodinger operators via the commutation
method; L. Rey-Bellet, Statistical mechanics of anharmonic
lattices; R. Shvidkoy and Y. Latushkin, The essential spectrum of the linearized 2d Euler operator is a vertical band;
j. P. Solovej and W. L. Spitzer, New coherent states and a new
proof of the Scott correction; B. Su, Remark on weak solutions
of stationary conduction-convection problems; V. Tkachenko,
Spectrum of 1-d selfadjoint periodic differential operator of
order 4; K. Trivisa, BV estimates for nxn systems of conservation laws; R. Weder, The time-dependent approach to
inverse scattering; R. Young, Blowup in hyperbolic conservation laws.
Contemporary Mathematics, Volume 327
June 2003, 387 pages, Softcover, ISBN 0-8218-3296-4,
LC 2003045382, 2000 Mathematics Subject Classification:
34-06,35-06,76-06,81-06,82-06, All AMS members $79,
List $99, Order code CONM/327N

The volume is intended for graduate students and researchers
interested in mathematical physics.

This item will also be of interest to those working in differential
equations.
Contents: A. A. Balinsky and W. D. Evans, Zero modes of
Pauli and Weyl-Dirac operators; R. D. Benguria, The LaneEmden equation revisited; C. Bennewitz, A Paley-Wiener

734

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

New Publications Offered by the AMS

Number Theory

MEIY!9 IRS
Arncncan Mathematical SOClcty

Independent Study
University

LECTURE
Series
Cohomological Invariants
in Galois Cohomology
Skip Garibaldi
Alexander MerkUIjev
Jean-Pierre Serre

AIIHIIl 11l i\11tllllllltli

11 ~0l1C t\

Cohomological
Invariants in Galois
Cohomology

On Central Critical Values
of the Degree Four
L-functions for GSp(4):
The Fundamental Lemma
Masaaki Furusawa
Joseph A. Shalika

s~p Garibaldi, Emo~

University, Atlanta,

Amcncnn Mnthcmaticnl SOCICty

Alexander Merkurjev,
University of California, Los
Angeles, and Jean-Pierre Serre,
College de France, Paris

This volume addresses algebraic invariants that occur in the
confluence of several important areas of mathematics,
including number theory, algebra, and arithmetic algebraic
geometry. The invariants are analogues for Galois cohomology
of the characteristic classes of topology, which have been
extremely useful tools in both topology and geometry. It is
hoped that these new invariants will prove similarly useful.
Early versions of the invariants arose in the attempt to classify
the quadratic forms over a given field.
The authors are well-known experts in the field. Serre, in
particular, is recognized as both a superb mathematician and
a master author. His book on Galois cohomology from the
1960s was fundamental to the development of the theory.
Merkurjev, also an expert mathematician and author, co-wrote
The Book of Involutions (Volume 44 in the AMS Colloquium
Publications series), an important work that contains preliminary descriptions of some of the main results on invariants
described here.

On Central Critical
Values of the Degree
Four I-functions for
GSp(4): The
Fundamental Lemma
Masaaki Furusawa, Osaka City
University, Japan, and
Joseph A. Shalika, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore,

MD
Contents: Statement of results; Gauss sum, Kloosterman sum
and Salie sum; Matrix argument Kloosterman sums; Evaluation
of the Novodvorsky orbital integral; Evaluation of the Bessel
orbital integral; Evaluation of the quadratic orbital integral;
Bibliography.
.
Memoirs of the American Mathematical Society, Volume 164,
Number 782
July 2003, 139 pages, Softcover, ISBN 0-8218-3328-6,
LC 2003048027, 2000 Mathematics Subject Classification:
11F46, 11F70, 11L05; 11F67, 11F72, 22E50, 22E55,Individual
member $33, List $55, Institutional member $44, Order code
MEMOj164j782N

The book also includes letters between Serre and some of the
principal developers of the theory. It will be of interest to
graduate students and research mathematicians interested in
number theory and Galois cohomology.
This item will also be of interest to those working in algebra
and algebraic geometry.
Contents: Cohomological invariants, Witt invariants, and trace
forms: Contents; Introduction; The notion of "invariant"; Cohomological preliminaries: The local case; Cohomological
preliminaries: The function field case; Specialization properties of cohomological invariants; Restriction and corestriction
of invariants; Cohomological invariants of On, SOn, ... ; Cohomological invariants of etale algebras; Witt invariants; The
trace form in dimension::; 7; A letter from M. Rost to J-P.
Serre; A letter from J-P. Serre to R. S. Garibaldi; A letter from
B. Totaro to J-P. Serre; Rost invariants of simply connected
algebraic groups: Contents; Rost invariants of simply
connected algebraic groups; The groups Hd+l (P, Q./71.(d));
Tables of Dynkin indices; Bibliography; Index of notation;
\ Index of terms.
University Lecture Series, Volume 28
July 2003, approximately 176 pages, Softcover, ISBN 0-8218-3287-5, LC 2003048151, 2000 Mathematics Subject
Classification: 12G05, 11E72, All AMS members $28, List $35,
Order code ULECTj28N

JUNE/JULY 2003

NOTICES OF THE AMS

735

Classified Advertisements
Positions available, items for sale, services available, and more
CALIFORNIA
THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA
AT MERCED
Mathematics and Statistics
000047

The University of California at Merced is
the tenth campus of the UC system and the
first American research university built in
the 21st century. UCM will open with an
initial enrollment of 1,000 undergraduate
and graduate students in fall 2004 and
grow to 25,000 at final build-out. The
Division of Natural Sciences invites applications for faculty positions at all levels in
mathematics and statistics. We seek distinguished scholars who will establish or
maintain creative, vigorous research programs in a multidisciplinary environment
where science and engineering are closely
integrated, participate actively in the development of innovative interdisciplinary
curricula, and teach effectively at both
the undergraduate and graduate levels. We
particularly encourage applicants in the
fields of applied mathematics and statistics, although all areas of mathematics will
be considered. Applicants should submit
a CV, publication list, and statements of
research interests and teaching philosophy. Candidates should provide contact
information for five references. Materials
should be sent to ucmsearch@ucop. edu.
To be assured of full consideration, applications should be received by August 1,
2003. The University of California, Merced,

is an Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer with a strong institutional
commitment to the achievement of diversity among its faculty, staff, and students.
UC Merced is particularly interested in candidates who have experience working with
faculty, staff, and students from diverse
backgrounds and a demonstrated commitment to improving access to higher
education for disadvantaged and underrepresented students. The university is
supportive of dual-career couples.

MICHIGAN
MICHIGAN STATE UNIVERSITY
proMSc Program in
Industrial Mathematics
East Lansing, MI 48824
000001

Direct your students. toward one of the
professional M.Sc. programs. Industry
needs business-savvy mathematicians. See
http://www.sciencemasters.com/.

PUBLICATIONS AVAILABLE
A NEW JOURNAL ON
SAMPLING THEORY
000045

Sampling Theory in Signal and Image Processing (STSIP)- An International Journal
publishes refereed articles in sampling
and interpolation theory, wavelets, tomography, the Gibbs phenomenon, and other

Suggested uses for classified advertising are positions available, books

or lecture notes for sale, books being sought, exchange or rental of
houses, and typing services.
The 2003 rate is $100 per inch or fraction thereof on a single column
(one-inch minimum), calculated from top of headline. Any fractional text
of 1/2 inch or more will be charged at the next inch rate. No discounts for
multiple ads or the same ad in consecutive issues. For an additional $10
charge, announcements can be placed anonymously. Correspondence will
be forwarded.
Advertisements in the "Positions Available" classified section will be set
with a minimum one-line headline, consisting of the institution name
above body copy, unless additional headline copy is specified by the
advertiser. Headlines will be centered in boldface at no extra charge. Ads
will appear in the language in which they are submitted.
There are no member discounts for classified ads. Dictation over the
telephone will not be accepted for classified advertising.
Upcoming deadlines for classified advertising are as follows: August
2003 issue-May 28, 2003; September 2003 issue-June 26, 2003; Octo-

736

related areas. To order, see http://www .
j erria. com; email: aj erri@clarkson.
edu; teL (315) 265-1005, 268-2373.
INTEGRAL EQUATIONS
SOLUTION MANUAL
000046

This is the first student's solution manual
in integral equations. It accompanies (the
complete and applied book - Math. Revs.)
Intra. to Integral Eqns. with Applications2nd Ed., Wiley, 1999, by A. ]. Jerri. See
http://www.jerria.com/. Call Barnes and
Noble, (315) 265-9260; email: clarkson@
bkstore. com, or aj erri@clarkson. edu.

WRITER WANTED
000044

NEEDED: The help of a mathematician to
write an introduction based on Mintz's
completed work; Mintz's website: http:
Ilwww. euclidchallenge . org/, which includes: Euclid Challenge-Successful Response; Review by an American professor of mathematics; Pierre Wantzel (19th
century): When using "Traditional Euclidian Methods"; Comparison: Archimedes,
Hippias Quadratrix, Milton A. Mintz; Use
of Euclid tools: Unmarked straightedge
and compass only; Mintz methods include proof of accuracy; Mintz methods:
(1) trisection of any angle; (2) square a
circle. Milton A. Mintz, email: milton@
euclidchallenge.org.

ber 2003 issue-July 30, 2003; November 2003 issue-August 28, 2003;
December 2003 issue-October 1, 2003; January 2004 issue-October 28,
2003
U.S. laws prohibit discrimination in employment on the basis of color,
age, sex, race, religion, or national origin. "Positions Available" advertisements from institutions outside the U.S. cannot be published unless they
are accompanied by a statement that the institution does not discriminate
on these grounds whether or not it is subject to U.S. laws. Details and
specific wording may be found on page 1373 (vol. 44).
Situations wanted advertisements from involuntarily unemployed
mathematicians are accepted under certain conditions for free publication. Call toll-free 800-321-4AMS (321-4267) in the U.S. and Canada or
401-455-4084 worldwide for further information.
Submission: Promotions Department, AMS, P. O. Box 6248, Providence,
Rhode Island 02940; or via fax: 401-331-3842; or send email to classads@
ams. arg. AMS location for express delivery packages is 201 Charles
Street, Providence, Rhode Island 02904. Advertisers will be billed upon
publication.

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

International Mathematics
Research Notices
Editors
Morris Weisfeld
Managing Editor
Dan Abramovich
Enrico Arbarello
Joseph Bernstein
Enrico Bombieri
Richard E. Borcherds
Alexei Borodin
Jean Bourgain
Marc Burger
Tobias Colding
Corrado DeConcini
Percy Deift
Robbert Dijkgraaf
S. K. Donaldson
WeinanE
Yakov Eliashberg
Edward Frenkel
Emmanuel Hebey
Dennis Hejhal
Helmut Hofer
Gerhard Huisken
Yasutaka Ihara
Kurt Johansson
Masaki Kashiwara
Carlos Kenig
Sergiu Klainerman
Toshiyuki Kobayashi
Maxim Kontsevich
Igor Krichever
Shigeo Kusuoka
Gilles Lebeau
Joachim Lohkamp
Nikolai Makarov
Yu. 1. l\I~anin
Barry Mazur
Haynes Miller
Shinichi Mochizuki
Fabien Morel
Shigefumi Mori
Stefan Muller
R. V. Pandharipande
Michael Rapoport
N. Yu. Reshetikhin
Peter Sarnak
Freydoon Shahidi
Stanislav Smirnov
Michael Struwe
G. Tian
Takeshi Tsuji
David Vogan
Dan Voiculescu
Andrei Zelevinsky
Maciej Zworski

Web Site: http://imrn.hindawi.com
AIMS AND SCOPE

IMRN provides very fast publication of research articles of high current interest in all areas of
mathematics. All articles are fully refereed and are judged by their contribution to advancing
the state of the science of mathematics. Issues are published as frequently as necessary.
IMRN will publish 52± issues in 2003. The articles of the IMRN are reviewed/indexed in
COMPUMATH Citation Index, Current Contents, lSI Alerting Services, Mathematical Reviews,
PubSCIENCE, Science Citation Index, SciSearch, and Zentralblatt fur Mathematik.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR AUTHORS

IMRN is devoted to advancing the state of the science of mathematics by publishing research
articles of high current interest in all fields of mathematics. Articles of any length are welcome
and all articles are refereed and judged for correctness, interest, originality, depth, and applicability. There are no page charges. Submissions are made by email to submit@imrn.hindawLcom.
An abstract for each article should be included. A copy may also be sent to an editor. Only an
acknowledgment from the editorial office officially establishes the date of receipt. Submissions
not prepared using TEX should be typed or printed on one side of the page, be double-spaced
(including references), have ample margins, and be accompanied by a page that lists all
potentially ambiguous notations. Check contact information for submission by fax or post.
When articles are accepted, production begins immediately; authors should be available to
assist the editorial staff.
FORTHCOMING ARTICLES

• A Poisson Summation Formula and Lower Bounds for Resonances in Hyperbolic Manifolds, Peter A. Perry
• Abelian Ideals of a Borel Subalgebra and Long Positive Roots, Dmitri 1. Panyushev
• Characterization of the Spectrum of Schrodinger Operators with Periodic Distributions,
Evgeni Korotyaev

• Exceptional Characters and Prime Numbers in Arithmetic Progressions, J. B. Friedlander
and H. Iwaniec

• Finite Rank Vector Bundles on Inductive Limits of Grassmannians, Joseph Donin and
IvanPenkov

•
•
•
•

Frobenius Distributions of Elliptic Curves over Finite Prime Fields, Ernst-Ulrich Gekeler
Koszul Duality and Equivariant Cohomology for Tori, Matthias Franz
Omega Results for the Divisor and Circle Problems, K. Soundararajan
On Mackey's Irreducibility Criterion for Induced Representations, M. Bachir Bekka and
Robyn Curtis

• On the Poincare Series of Quadratic Algebras Associated to Hecke Symmetries, Nguyen
Phuong Dung and Phung Ho Hai

• On the Topology of Lagrangian Milnor Fibres, Mauricio D. Garay and Duco van Straten
• Spectral Triples from Mumford Curves, C. Consani and M. Marcolli
• The Golinskii-Ibragimov Method and a Theorem of Damanik and Killip, Barry Simon
SUBSCRIPTION INFORMATION

Institutional subscription rates for year 2003 (52± issues) are $1295 for print and online editions or $1036 for online edition only. Please contact orders@hindawLcom for personal subscription rates, multiple year subscriptions, or purchase of back volumes. Back volumes are
available starting from the volume of 1991.

Publishing Corporation, 410 Park Avenue, 15th Floor, #287 pmb, New York,
HINDAWI Hindawi
NY 10022, USA; Fax 1-866-446-3294 (USA, toll-free)

The Mathematical Reviews Database on the Web-your
premier source for searching the world's mathematical
literature!

'.

dd \\n\<S

www.arns.org/rnathscinet
MathSciNet is a unique database of a scholarly nature ... It has
excellent coverage of current mathematics literature, providing signed
reviews of mathematics articles, conference proceedings, and books
of mathematical research. It is a database which is useful not only
to mathematicians, but to science and engineering faculty also.
-Issues in Science & Technology Librarianship

APPLICATION
MEMBER
.,

20

Family Name

First

Middle

State

Country

Place of Birth:
City

Fields of Interest
If you wish to be on the mailirg lists to receive information about publications in'
fields of mathematics in which you have an interest, please consult the list of major
headings below. These categories will be added to your computer record so that
you will be informed of new publications or special sales in the fields you have indicated.
00
01
03
05
06

Date of Birth:
Day

Month

Year

If formerly a member of AMS, please indicate dates

_

. Check here if you are now ~ member of either D MAA or D SIAM
Degrees, with institutions and dates

_

Firm or institution

_

Zip/Country

State

08
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18

_

Present position

City

JANUARY-DECEMBER

WWW.AMS.ORO/MEMBERSHIP

Please read the "Membership Categories" section of this form to determine the
membership category for which you are eligible. Then fill out this application and
return it as soon as possible.
Date

2 03

FOR
I

Primary Fields of Interest (choose five from the list at right)

19
20
22
26
28
30
31
32
33
34
35
37
39
40
41
42
43
44

Secondary Fields of Interest (choose from the list at right)

45

General
History and biography
Mathematical logic and foundations
Combinatorics
Order, lattices, ordered algebraic
structures
General algebraic systems
Number theory
Field theory and polynomials
Commutative rings and algebras
Algebraic geometry
Linear and multilinear algebra;
matrix theory
Associative rings and algebras
Nonassociative rings and algebras
Category theory, homological
algebra
K-theory
Group theory and generalizations
Topological groups, Lie groups
Real functions
Measure and integration
Functions of a complex variable
Potential theory
Several complex variables and
analytic spaces
Special functions
Ordinary differential equations
Partial differential equations
Dynamical systems and ergodic
theory
Difference and functional equations
Sequences, series, summability
Approximations and expansions
Fourier analysis
Abstract harmonic analysis
Integral transforms, operational
calculus
Integral equations

46
47
49
51
52
53
54
55
57
58
60
62
65
68
70
74
76
78
80
81
82
83
85
86
90
91
92
93
94
97

Functional analysis
Operator theory
Calculus of variations and optimal
control; optimization
Geometry
Convex and discrete geometry
Differential geometry
General topology
Algebraic topology
Manifolds and cell complexes
Global analysis, analysis on
manifolds
Probability theory and stochastic
processes
Statistics
Numerical analysis
Computer science
Mechanics of particles and systems
Mechanics of deformable solids
Fluid mechanics
Optics, electromagnetic theory
Classical thermodynamics, heat
transfer
Quantum theory
Statistical mechanics, structure of
matter
Relativity and gravitational theory
Astronomy and astrophysics
Geophysics
Operations research, mathematical
programming,
Game theory, economics, social
and behavioral sciences
Biology and other natural sciences
Systems theory; control
Information and communication,
circuits
Mathematics Education

Address for all mail

All prices quoted in U.S. dollars.
Payment by check must be drawn on U.S. bank if paid in U.S. dollars.

Send checks, money orders, UNESCO coupons to American
Mathematical Society, P.O. Box 845904, Boston, MA 02284-5904.
Telephone: home: (_ _ )
Fax: (_ _ )

_

office: (_ _ )

_

_

E-mail:

_

Signature

To use credit cards, fill in information requested and mail to American
Mathematical Society, P.O. Box 6248, Providence, RI 02940-6248 or call
(401) 455-4000 or 1-800-321-4AMS.
For Foreign Bank Transfers: Citizens Bank, 1 Citizens Drive,
Riverside, RI 02915, ABA #011-500-120, for American Mathematical
Society, Acct #1107802021.
D American Express

D Discover

DVISA

D MasterCard

D Check here if you would like to receive your dues renewal notices electronically.

D Please send me electronic notification about new AMS publications.
Account number

Expiration date

IM03NOI

Membership
Please read the following to determine what membership category you are eligible for,
and then indicate below the category for which you are applying.
Members can purchase a multi-year membership by prepaying their current dues rate
for either two, three, four or five years. This option is not available to category-S, unemployed, or student members.
Introductory ordinary member rate applies to the first five consecutive years of ordinary membership. Eligibility begins with the first year of membership in any category
other than student and nominee. Dues are $54.
For ordinary members whose annual professional income is below $75,000, the dues
are $108; for those whose annual professional income is $75,000 or more, the dues are
$144.
Minimum dues for contributing members are $216. The amount paid which exceeds
the higher ordinary dues level and is purely voluntary may be treated as a charitable contribution.
For a joint family membership, one member pays ordinary dues, based on his or her
income; the other pays ordinary dues based on his or her income, less $20. (Only the
member paying full dues will receive the Notices and the Bulletin as a privilege of membership, but both members will be accorded all other privileges of membership.)
The annual dues for reciprocity members who reside outside the U.S. are $72. To be
eligible for this classification, members must belong to one of those foreign societies
with which the AMS has established a reciprocity agreement. Annual verification is
required. Reciprocity members who reside in the U.S. must pay ordinary member dues
($108 or $144).
The annual dues for category-S members, those who reside in developing countries,
are $16. Members can chose only one privilege journal.Please indicate your choice below.
For either students or unemployed individuals, dues are $36, and annual verification
is required.

1003 Dues

o Allahabad Mathematical Society
o Australian Mathematical Society
o Azerbaijan Mathematical Society
o Balkan Society of Geometers
o Belgian Mathematical Society
o Berliner Mathematische
Gessellschaft

0 $54

Ordinary member

0$108

0$144

Joint family member (full rate)

0$108

0$144

Joint family member (reduced rate)............................................... 0$88

0$124

Contributing member (minimum $216)

0

Student member (please verify) I........................................................................ 0$36

0$36

Unemployed member (please verify)2
3

Reciprocity member (please verify) ••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 0$72

0$108

0$144

Category-S member 4•••••.•...•.••.•.•.•.•••.••...•.••.•••.••••..•.••.••.••..•..••.••.. ~....................... 0 $16

$

Multi-year membership

for

years

1 Student Verification (sign below)

I am a full-time student at - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

D Deutsche Mathematiker-Vereinigung

o Edinburgh Mathematical Society
D Egyptian Mathematical Society

o European Mathematical Society
D Gesellschaft fOr Angewandte
Mathematik und Mechanik

o Glasgow Mathematical Association
o Hellenic Mathematical Society
o Icelandic Mathematical Society
o Indian Mathematical Society
o Iranian Mathematical Society
D Irish Mathematical Society

o Israel Mathematical Union
o Janos Bolyai Mathematical Society
o London Mathematical Society
o Malaysian Mathematical Society
o Mathematical Society of Japan
o Mathematical Society of Serbia
o Mathematical Society of the
Philippines

o Mathematical Society of the
Republic of China

o Mongolian Mathematical Society
o Nepal Mathematical Society
o New Zealand Mathematical Society
o Nigerian Mathematical Society
o Norsk Matematisk Forening
o Osterreichische Mathematische

2 Unemployed Verification (sign below) I am currently unemployed and actively

o Polskie Towarzystwo Matematyczne
o Punjab Mathematical Society
o Ramanujan Mathematical Society

Sciences

OReal Sociedad Matematica Espanola

o Saudi Association for Mathematical
Sciences

Signature

o Singapore Mathematical Society

o Sociedad Colombiana de
40

send NOTICES

o send BULLETIN

Estadfstica

o Sociedade Paranaense de

o Danish Mathematical Society

Gesellschaft

the society indicated on the right and am therefore eligible for reciprocity membership.

o Sociedad Matematica Mexicana
o Sociedad Uruguaya de Matematica y

D Cyprus Mathematical Society

o Palestine Society for Mathematical

3 Reciprocity Membership Verification (sign below) I am currently a member of

Republica Dominicana

o Sociedade Brasileira Matematica
o Sociedade Brasileira de Matematica

_________________ currently working toward a degree.

seeking employment.

Aplicada

o Sociedad de Matematica de Chile
o Sociedad Matematica de la

o Calcutta Mathematical Society
o Canadian Mathematical Society
o Croatian Mathematical Society

D The Korean Mathematical Society

Ordinary member, introductory rate

o Sociedad Espanola de Matematica

Matematicas

Aplicada e Computacional
Matematica

o Sociedade Portuguesa de
Matematica

o Societat Catalana de Matematiques
o Societatea de $tiinte Matematice din
Romania

o Societatea Matematicienilor din
Romania

o SOCiE3te Mathematique de France
o Societe Mathematique du
Luxembourg

o Societe Mathematique Suisse
D Societe Mathematiques Appliquees
et Industrielles

o Society of Associations of
Mathematicians &Computer
Science of Macedonia

o Society of Mathematicians,
Physicists, and Astronomers of
Slovenia

o South African Mathematical Society
o Southeast Asian Mathematical
Society

o Suomen Matemaattinen Yhdistys
o Svenska Matematikersamfundet
o Ukrainian Mathematical Society
o Union Mathematica Argentina
o Union of Bulgarian Mathematicians
o Union of Czech Mathematicians and
Physicists

o Union of Slovak Mathematicians and
Physicists

o Unione Matematica Italiana
o Vijnana Parishad of India
o Wiskundig Genootschap

Qty.

Code

Price

Title

Total

For orders with
remittances:
(Payment must be made in U. S.
currency drawn on a U. S. bank.)
American Mathematical Society
P.O. Box 845904
Boston, MA 02284-5904, USA
For credit card orders:
American Mathematical Society
P. O. Box 6248
Providence, RI 02940-6248, USA
1-800-321-4AMS (4267)
1-401-455-4000, worldwide
fax 1-401-455-4046
cust-serv@ams.org

Shipping and Handling
Residents of Canada, please include 7% GST.

Total

PAYMENT

METHOD

D Check or Money Order

D American Express

D Discover

Please send me
information about AMS
membership

D MasterCard

D VISA

D individual

Card Number

_

Expiration Date

_

D institutional
D corporate

D institutional associate

Signature

CHARGE

BY

PHONE

IN

US

AND

CANADA

800.321.4AMS

Publications, videotapes, and miscellaneous items are sent via UPS to U.S. addresses and as printed matter elsewhere unless another delivery method is
requested. Prices subject to change without notice.
AMS Textbooks: Books marked "Recommended Text" are available as examination copies for possible course adoption. To request an exam copy, please
write to us on departmental letterhead specifying the book requested, course title and number, term taught, anticipated enrollment, expected decision
date, and the text currently in use.

VISIT

THE

AMS

BOO K S TOR EAT

www.ams.orgjbookstore

Fold here

NO POSTAGE
NECESSARY

IF MAILED
IN THE
UNITED STATES

BUSINESS REPLY MAIL
FIRST-CLASS MAIL PERMIT NO. 554B PROVIDENCE, RI

POSTAGE WILL BE PAID BY ADDRESSEE

Membership and Customer Services
AMERICAN MATHEMATICAL SOCIETY
P.o. Box 6248
Providence, RI 02940-4248 USA

•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• G •••••••• '

Fold here

Name

_

Cu stomer code

_

Change effective as of

_

Old mailing address

New mailing address

Members of the Society

When changing their

who move or change posi-

addresses, members are

tions are urged to notify the

urged to cooperate by sup-

Providence Office as soon as

plying the requested infor-

possible.

mation. The Society's

New position

_

If mailing address is not that of your employer,

records are of value only to
Journal mailing lists must be
the extent that they are cu rprinted four to six weeks

please supply the following information:

rent and accurate.
before the issue date.

New em pi oye r

Therefore, in order to avoid

If your address has changed

disruption of service, mem-

or will change within the

bers are requested to pro-

next two or three months,

vide the required notice well

please fill out this form, sup-

in advance.

ply any other information

_

Location of employer (city, state, zip code, country)

appropriate for the AMS
Besides mailing addresses
records, and mail it to:
for members, the Society's
records contain information

Customer Services

about members' positions

AMS

and their employers (for

P.o. Box 6248

publication in the Combined

Providence, RI

Membership List). In addi-

02940-6248 USA

Telephone/home:

or send the information on
the form bye-mail to:
awards, and information on

amsmem@ams.org or

Society service.
cust-serv@ams.org

_

Fax:

_

e-mail

_

tion, the AMS maintains
records of members' honors,

office:

Recent honors and awards

Fold here

NO POSTAGE
NECESSARY
IF MAILED
IN THE
UNITED STATES

BUSINESS REPLY MAIL
FIRST-CLASS MAIL PERMIT NO. 554B PROVIDENCE, RI

POSTAGE WILL BE PAID BY ADDRESSEE

Membership and Customer Services
AMERICAN MATHEMATICAL SOCIETY
P.o. Box 6248
Providence, RI 02940-4248 USA

.................................................................................................
Fold here

~

~

~

.

Meetings & Conferences
oftheAMS

Seville, Spain

Luis Vega, Universidad del Pais Vasco, Bilbao, Integrating

June 18-21,2003

Efim Zelmanov, Yale University, Infinite dimensional al-

Meeting #988

Special Sessions

factors and generalized Schrodinger flows.
gebras and superalgebras.

First Joint International Meeting between the AMS and the
Real Sociedad Matematica Espanola (RSME).

Associate secretary: Susan J. Friedlander
Announcement issue of Notices: February 2003
Program first available on AMS website: To be announced
Program issue of electronic Notices: To be announced
Issue of Abstracts: To be announced

Deadlines
For organizers: Expired
For consideration of contributed papers in Special Sessions:
Expired
For abstracts: Expired
Invited Addresses
Xavier Cabre, Universitat Politecnica de Cataluna,
Barcelona, Phase transition layers, minimal surfaces, and
ground states.

Charles Fefferman, Princeton University, Beyond the Whitney extension theorem.

Michael Hopkins, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Title to be announced.

Ignacio Sols, Universidad Complutense, Madrid, Stability
of principal bundles.
JUNE/jULY 2003

Affine Algebraic Geometry, jaime Gutierrez, University of

Cantabria, Vladimir Shpilrain, City College of New York,
and jie-Tai Yu, University of Hong Kong.
Algebraic Geometry, Felix Delgado, Universidad de Valladolid, and Andrey N. Todorov, University of California
Santa Cruz.
Algebraic Toplogy, Alejandro Adem, University of Wisconsin, j. Aguade, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona,
and Eric M. Friedlander, Northwestern University.
Banach Spaces of Analytic Functions, Daniel Girela, University of Malaga, and Michael Stessin, SUNY at Albany.
Biomolecular Mathematics, Thomas J. Head and Fernando
Guzman, SUNY at Binghamton, Mario Perez, Universidad
de Sevilla, and Carlos Martin-Vide, Rovira i Virgili University.
Classical and Harmonic Analysis, Nets Katz, Washington
University, Carlos Perez, Universidad de Sevilla, and Ana
Vargas, Universidad Aut6noma de Madrid.
Combinatorics, Joseph E. Bonin, George Washington University, and Marc Noy, Universitat Politecnica de Catalufia.
Commutative Algebra: Geometric, Homological, Combinatorial and ComputationalAspects, Alberto Corso, University

NOTICES OF THE AMS

745

Meetings & Conferences

of Kentucky, Philippe Gimenez, Universidad de Valladolid,
and Santiago Zarzuela, Universitat de Barcelona.
Computational Methods in Algebra and Analysis, Eduardo
Cattani, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, and Francisco Jesus Castro-Jimenez, Universidad de Sevilla.
Constructive Approximation Theory, Antonio Duran,
Universidad de Sevilla, and Edward B. Saff, Vanderbilt
University.
Control and Geometric Mechanics, Manuel de Leon, Instituto de Matematicas y Fisica Fundamental, Alberto Ibort,
Universidad Carlos III, and Francesco Bullo, University of
Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.
Differential·Galois Theory, Teresa Crespo and Zbigniew
Hajto, Universitat de Barcelona, and Andy R. Magid, University of Oklahoma.
Differential Structures and Homological Methods in Commutative Algebra and Algebraic Geometry, Gennady

Lyubeznik, University of Minnesota, and Luis NarvaezMacarro, Universidad de Sevilla.
Discrete and Computational Geometry, Ferran Hertado,
Universitat Politecnica de Catalufia, and William Steiger,
Rutgers University.
Dynamical Systems, George Haller, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, Zbigniew H. Nitecki, Tufts University,
Enrique Ponce, Universidad de Sevilla, Tere M. Seara,
Universitat Politecnica de Catalufia, and Xavier Jarque,
Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona.
Effective Analytic Geometry over Complete Fields, LuisMiguel Pardos, Universidad de Cantabria, and J. Maurice
Rojas, Texas A&M University.
Geometric Methods in Group Theory, Jose Burillo, Universitat Politecnica de Catalufia, Jennifer Tayback, University
of Albany, and Enric Ventura, Universitat Politecnica de
Catalufia.
History of Modern Mathematics-Gauss to Wiles, Jose
Ferreiros, Universidad de Sevilla, and David Rowe,
Universitat Mainz.
Homological Methods in Banach Space Theory, Jesus M. F.
Castillo, Universidad de Extremadura, and N. J. Kalton,
University of Missouri.
Homotopy Algebras, Pedro Real, Universidad de Sevilla,
Thomas J. Lada, North Carolina State University, and
James Stasheff, University of North Carolina.
Interpolation Theory, Function Spaces and Applications,

Fernando Cobos, Universidad Complutense de Madrid,
and Pencho Petrushev, University of South Carolina.
Lorentzian Geometry and Mathematical Relativity, Luis J.
Alias, pniversidad de Murcia, and Gregory James
Galloway, University of Miami.
Mathematical Aspects of Semiconductor Modeling and
Nano-technology, Irene Martinez Gamba, University of

Texas at Austin, and Jose Antonio Carrillo, Universidad
de Granada.
Mathematical Fluid Dynamics, Diego Cordoba, CSIC,
Madrid, and Princeton University, Susan Friedlander,
746

University of Illinois, Chicago, and Marcos Antonio Fontelos, Universidad Rey Juan Carlos.
Mathematical Methods in Finance and Risk Management,

Santiago Carrillo Menendez, Universidad Aut6noma de
Madrid, Antonio Falcos Montesinos, Universidad Cardenal Herrera CEU, Antonio Sanchez-Calle, Universidad
Aut6noma de Madrid, and Luis A. Seco, University of
Toronto at Mississauga.
Mathematics of Electronmicroscopic Imaging, Jose-Maria
Carazo, Centro Nacional de Biotecnologia-CSIC, and
Gabor T. Herman, City University of New York.
Moduli Spaces in Geometry and Physics, Steven B. Bradlow,
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, and Oscar
Garcia-Prada, Universidad Aut6noma de Madrid.
Nonassociative Algebras and Their Applications, Efim I.
Zelmanov, Yale University, Santos Gonzalez, Universidad
de Oviedo, and Alberto Elduque, Universidad de Zaragoza.
Nonlinear Dispersive Equations, Gustavo Ponce, University
of California Santa Barbara, and Luis Vega, Universidad del
Pais Vascos.
Numerical Linear Algebra, Lothar Reichel, Kent State University, and Francisco Marcellan, University Carlos III de
Madrid.
Operator Theory and Spaces of Analytic Functions, Jose
Bonet, Universidad Politecnica de Valencia, Pedro Paul,
Universidad de Sevilla, and Cora S. Sadosky, Howard
University.
PDE Methods in Continuum Mechanics, Juan L. Vazquez,
Universidad Aut6noma de Madrid, and J. W. Neuberger,
University of North Texas.
Polynomials and Multilinear Analysis in Infinite Dimensions, Richard M. Aron; Kent State University, J. A. Jaramillo

and Jose G. Uavona, Universidad Complutense de Madrid,
and Andrew M. Tonge, Kent State University.
Quantitative Results in Real Algebra and Geometry, Carlos
Andradas and Antonio Diaz-Cano, Universidad Complutense, Victoria Powers, Emory University, and Frank
Sottile, University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Recent Developments in the Mathematical Theory ofInverse
Problems, Russell Brown, University of Kentucky, Alberto

Ruiz, Universidad Aut6noma de Madrid, and Gunther
UWmann, University of Washington.
Riemannian Foliations, Jesus Antonio Alvarez Lopez, Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, and Efton L. Park,
Texas Christian University.
Ring Theory and Related Topics, Jose Gomez-Torrecillas,
University of Granada, Pedro Antonio Guil Asensio,
University of Murcia, Sergio R. Lopez-Permouth, Ohio
University, and BIas Torrecillas, University of Almeria.
Variational Problems for Submanifolds, Frank Morgan,
Williams College, and Antonio Ros, Universidad de
Granada.

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUM~ 50, NUMBER 6

Meetings & Conferences

Boulder, Colorado
University of Colorado
October 2-4, 2003
Meeting #989
Joint Central/Western Section
Associate secretaries: Susan J. Friedlander and Michel L.
Lapidus
Announcement issue of Notices: August 2003
Program first available on AMS website: August 21,2003
Program issue of electronic Notices: October 2003
Issue of Abstracts: Volume 24, Issue 4
Deadlines
For organizers: Expired
For consideration of contributed papers in Special Sessions:
Expired
For abstracts: August I?, 2003
Invited Addresses
j. Brian Conrey, American Institute of Mathematics,
Random matrix theory and the Riemann zeta-function.
Giovanni Forni, Northwestern University, Title to be
announced.
juha M. Heinonen, University of Michigan, Title to be
announced.
joseph D. Lakey, New Mexico State University, Recent
progress in time-frequency analysis.
Albert Schwarz, University of California Davis, Maximally
supersymmetric gauge theories.
Brooke E. Shipley, Purdue University, Title to be announced.
Avi Wigderson, Institute for Advanced Study, Title to be
announced (Erdos Memorial Lecture).
Special Sessions
Algebraic Geometry (Code: AMS SS MI), Holger Kley, Rick
Miranda, and Chris Peterson, Colorado State University.
Algebras, Lattices and Varieties (Code: AMS SS AI), Keith A.
Kearnes, University of Colorado, Boulder, Agnes Szendrei,
Bolyai Institute, and Walter Taylor, University of Colorado,
Boulder.
Analysis on Singular Spaces (Code: AMS SS Ll), Mario
Bonk, University of Michigan, and juha Heinonen, Mathematical Sciences Research Institute.
Applications of Number Theory and Algebraic Geometry
to Coding (Code: AMS SS BI), David R. Grant, University
of Colorado, Boulder, jose Felipe Voloch, University of
Texas at Austin, and judy Leavitt Walker, University of
Nebraska, Lincoln.
Associative Rings and Their Modules (Code: AMS SS JI), Gene
Abrams, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs, and
Kent Fuller, University of Iowa.
JuNE/JULY 2003

Computational and Mathematical Biology (Code: AMS SS SI),
Harvey j. Greenberg, University of Colorado at Denver.
Computational Number Theory (Code: AMS SS RI), Brian
Conrey and Michael Rubinstein, American Institute of
Mathematics.
Dynamics of Rational Polygonal Billiards and Related
Systems (Code: AMS SS Kl), Giovanni Forni, Northwestern
University.
Finite Geometries (Code: AMS SS NI), Stanley E. Payne, University of Colorado, Denver, and Robert Allen Liebler,
Colorado State University.
Geometric Methods in Partial Differential Equations (Code:
AMS SS CI), jeanne N. Clelland, University of Colorado,
Boulder, and George R. Wilkins, University of Hawaii.
Graphs and Diagraphs (Code: AMS SS HI), Michael
jacobson, University of Colorado, Denver, and Richard j.
Lundgren, University of Colorado, Denver.
Groupoids in Analysis and Geometry (Code: AMS SS DI),
Lawrence Baggett, University of Colorado, Boulder, jerry
Kaminker, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis, and judith Packer, University of Colorado,
Boulder.
Homotopy Theory (Code: AMS SS Fl), Daniel Dugger,
University of Oregon, and Brooke E. Shipley, Purdue
University.
Noncommutative Geometry and Geometric Analysis (Code:
AMS SS EI), Carla Farsi, Alexander Gorokhovsky, and Siye
Wu, University of Colorado.
Nonlinear Waves (Code: AMS SS PI), Bernard Deconinck,
Colorado State University, and Harvey Segur, University
of Colorado, Boulder.
Structured Population and Epidemic Models: Periodicity,
Chaos, and Extinction (Code: AMS SS G1), Linda j. S. Allen,
Texas Tech University, and Sophia R.-j. jang, University
of Louisiana at Lafayette.
T)biquitous Heat Kernal (Code: AMS SS QI), jay jorgenson,
City College of New York, and Lynne Walling, University
of Colorado, Boulder.

Binghamton,
New York
Binghamton University
October 11-1 2, 2003
Meeting #990
Eastern Section
Associate secretary: Lesley M. Sibner
Announcement issue of Notices: August 2003
Program first available on AMS website: August 28, 2003
Program issue of electronic Notices: October 2003
Issue of Abstracts: Volume 24, Issue 4

NOTICES OF THE AMS

747

Meetings & Conferences
Deadlines
For organizers: Expired
For consideration of contributed papers in Special Sessions:
June 24, 2003
For abstracts: August 19, 2003
Invited Addresses
Peter Kuchment, Texas A&M University, Title to be
announced.

Zlil Sela, Einstein Institute of Mathematics, Title to be
announced.

Zoltan Szabo, Princeton University, Title to be announced.
Jeb F. Willenbring, Yale University, Title to be announced.
Special Sessions
Biomolecular Mathematics (Code: AMS SS AI), Thomas J.

Head and Dennis G. Pixton, Binghamton University,
Mitsunori Ogihara, University of Rochester, and Carlos
Martin-Vide, Universitat Rovira"i Virgilio
Boundary Value Problems on Singular Domains (Code: AMS
SS CI), Juan B. Gil, Temple University, and Paul A. Loya,
Binghamton University.
Character Theory ofFinite Groups and Algebraic Combinatorics(Code: AMS SS PI), Kenneth W. Johnson, Pennsylvania

State University, and Eirini Poimenidou, New College of
Florida.
Dowling Lattices: The 30th Anniversary (Code: AMS SS NI),
Thomas Zaslavsky, Binghamton University.
Finite Solvable Groups and Their Representations (Code:
AMS SS KI), Ben Brewster, Binghamton University, and
Arnold Feldman, Franklin & Marshall College.
Geometric Group Theory (Code: AMS SS BI), Zlil Sela,
Einstein Institute of Mathematics, and Ross Geoghegan,
Binghamton University.
Homotopy Theory: Honoring Peter Hilton on His Eightieth
Birthday (Code: AMS SS JI), Martin Bendersky and Joseph

Roitberg, Hunter College (CUNY).
Infinite Groups and Group Rings (Code: AMS SS DI), Luise-

Charlotte Kappe, Binghamton University, and Derek J. S.
Robinson, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.
Inverse Problems and Tomography (Code: AMS SS HI),
Peter Kuchment, Texas A&M University, Leonid A. Kunyansky, University of Arizona, and Eric Todd Quinto,
Tufts University.
Lie Algebras, Conformal Field Theory, and Related Topics

(Code: AMS SS EI), Chongying Dong, University of California
Santa Cruz, and Alex J. Feingold and Gaywalee Yamskulna,
Binghamton University.
Manifold Theory (Code: AMS SS LI), Erik K. Pedersen,
Binghamton University, and Ian Hambleton, McMaster
University.
Noncommutative Ring Theory (Code: AMS SS MI), Howard E.
Bell and Yuanlin Li, Brock University.
748

Probability Theory (Code: AMS SS FI), Miguel A. Arcones,
Binghamton University, and Evarist Gine, University of
Connecticut.
Quasigroups and Loops (Code: AMS SS RI), Tuval S. Foguel,
North Dakota State University, and J. D. Phillips, Wabash
College.
Statistics (Code: AMS SS Gl), Miguel A. Arcones, Anton
Schick, and Qiqing Yu, Binghamton University.
Topological Combinatorics (Code: AMS SS Ql), Laura M.
Anderson, Binghamton University, and Edward B. Swartz,
Cornell University.

Chapel Hill,
North Carolina
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
October 24-25,2003
Meeting #991
Southeastern Section
Associate secretary: John L. Bryant
Announcement issue of Notices: August 2003
Program first available on AMS website: September 11,
2003
Program issue of electronic Notices: October 2003
Issue of Abstracts: Volume 24, Issue 4
Deadlines
For organizers: Expired
For consideration of contributed papers in Special Sessions:
July 19,2003
For abstracts: September 3, 2003
Invited Addresses
James N. Damon, University of North Carolina, Title to be
announced.

Erica L. Flapan, Pomona College, Title to be announced.
Mary Ann Horn, Vanderbilt University, Title to be
announced.

Helmut Voelklein, University of Florida, Title to be
announced.

Special Sessions
Algebras and Their Representations (Code: AMS SS Ml),

Edward L. Green, Virginia Polytech Institute & State
University, and Ellen E. Kirkman, Wake Forest University.
Association Schemes: 1973-2003 (Code: AMS SS Fl), WilliamJ.
Martin, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, and Dijen K. RayChaudhuri, Ohio State University.
Banach Algebras and Several Complex Variables (Code: AMS
SS 11), John T. Anderson, College of the Holy Cross, and
Alexander J. Izzo, Bowling Green State University.
Commutative Rings and Monoids (Code: AMS SS Kl), Scott
Chapman, Trinity University.

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

Meetings & Conferences
Current Topics in Optical Communications Systems (Code:
AMS SS Ql), Rudy Horne and Tobias Schaefer, University
of North Carolina.
Group Actions on Curves (Code: AMS SS AI), Kay Magaard,

Wayne State University and University of Florida, and
Helmut Voelklein, University of Florida.
Group Cohomology in Algebra and Geometry (Code: AMS
SS £1), Richard M. Ham, Duke University, and Kevin P.
Knudson, Mississippi State University.
Homological Physics (Code: AMS SS 11), Thomas J. Lada,
North Carolina State University, and James Stasheff,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Knots, Links, and Embedded Graphs (Code: AMS SS Cl),
Joel S. Foisy, SUNY at Potsdam, and Erica L. Flapan,
Pomona College.
Linear Operators on Function Spaces (Code: AMS SS Gl),

Nathan S. Feldman, Washington and Lee University, and
William T. Ross, University of Richmond.
Mathematical Modeling in Physiology and Medicine (Code:
AMS SS N1), Mary Ann Horn, Vanderbilt University.
Mathematical Molecular Biology (Code: AMS SS PI), Dorothy

Buck, Brown University.

Invited Addresses
R. Balasubramanian, Institute for Mathematical Sciences,
Title to be announced.

George C. Papanicolaou, Stanford University, Title to be
announced.

M. S. Raghunathan, Tata Institute of Fundamental
Research, Title to be announced.
Peter Sarnak, Princeton University and NYU, Courant
Institute, Title to be announced.
K. B. Sinha, Indian Statistical Institute, Title to be
announced.

Vladimir Voevodsky, Institute for Advanced Study, Title
to be announced.

Special Sessions
Algebraic and Geometric Methods in Multivariable Operator Theory, Ronald G. Douglas, Texas A&M University,

and Gadadhar Misra, Indian Statistical Institute.
Algebraic and Geometric Topology, Parameswaren
Sankaran, Institute of Mathematical Sciences, and P. B.

Shalen, University of Illinois.
Automorphic Forms and Functoriality, James Cogdell,

Measurable, Complex, and Symbolic Dynamics (Code: AMS

SS Dl), Jane M. Hawkins and Karl E. Petersen, University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Multiscale Challenges in Soft Matter Materials (Code: AMS

SS Ll), Gregory M. Forest, University of North Carolina,
Qi Wang, Florida State Univeristy, and Ruhai Zhou, University of North Carolina.
Nonlinear Wave Phenomena: Stability and Interactions

(Code: AMS SS HI), Christopher Jones, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, and Bjorn Sandstede, The Ohio
State University.

Bangalore, India

Oklahoma State University, and T. N. Venkataramana,
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research.
Buildings and Group Theory, N. S. Narasimha Sastry, Indian
Statistical Institute, and Richard M. Weiss, Tufts University.
Commutative Algebra and Algebraic Geometry, Sudhir
. Ghorpade, Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, Hema
Srinivasan, University of Missouri, and Jugal K. Verma,
Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay.
Cycles, K-Theory, and Motives, Eric M. Friedlander, Northwestern University, Steven Lichtenbaum, Brown University, Kapil Paranjape, Institute of Mathematical Sciences,
and Vasudevan Srinivas, Tata Institute of Fundamental
Research.
Differential Equations and Applications to Population
Dynamics, Epidemiology, Genetics and Microbiology,

Indian Institute of Science
December 17-20,2003
Meeting #992
First Joint AMS-India Mathematics Meeting

Associate secretary: Susan J. Friedlander
Announcement issue of Notices: To be announced
Program first available on AMS website: Not applicable
Program issue of electronic Notices: Not applicable
Issue of Abstracts: Not applicable

Bindhyachal Rai, University of Allahabad, Sanjay Rai,
Jacksonville University, Terrance Quinn, Ohio University
Southern, and Sunil Tiwari, Sonoma State University.
History ofIndian Mathematics, Gerard G. Emch, University
of Florida, and R. Sridharan, Chennai Mathematical
Institute.
L-Functions, Automorphic Forms and Cryptography,

R. Balasubramanian, Institute of Mathematical Sciences,
and K. Soundararajan, University of Michigan.
The Many Facets of Linear Algebra and Matrix Theory,

Deadlines
For organizers: Expired
For consideration of contributed papers in Special Sessions:
Not applicable
For abstracts: September 1, 2003
JUNE/JULY 2003

Richard Brualdi, University of Wisconsin, and Rajendra
Bhatia, Indian Statistical Institute.
PDE and Applications, Susan B. Friedlander, University of

Illinois, and P. N. Srikanth, Tata Institute of Fundamental
Research.

NOTICES OF THE AMS

749

Meetings & Conferences
Probability Theory, Rajeeva Karandikar, Indian Statistical
Institute, and Srinivasa R. S. Varadhan, NYU-Courant
Institute.
Quantum Dynamics, William Arveson, University of California Berkeley, and B. V. Rajarama Bhat, Indian Statistical
Institute.
Reductive Groups: Arithmetic, Geometry and Representation Theory, Vikram Mehta and R. Parimala, Tata Institute
of Fundamental Research, and Gopal Prasad, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Spectral and Inverse Spectral Theories of Schrodinger
Operators, Peter David Hislop, University of Kentucky, and
Krishna Maddaly, Institute of Mathematical Sciences.

Phoenix, Arizona
Phoenix Civic Plaza
January 7-10,2004
Wednesday - Saturday
Meeting #993
Joint Mathematics Meetings, including the 110th Annual
Meeting of the AMS, 87th Annual Meeting of the Mathematical Association ofAmerica (MAA), annual meetings of
the Association for Women in Mathematics (A WM) and the
National Association ofMathematicians (NAM), the winter
meeting of the Association for Symbolic Logic (ASL), with
sessions contributed by the Society for Industrial and
Applied Mathematics (SIAM).
Associate secretary: Michel L. Lapidus
Announcement issue of Notices: October 2003
Program first available on AMs website: November 1, 2003
Program issue of electronic Notices: January 2004
Issue of Abstracts: Volume 25, Issue 1
Deadlines
For organizers: Expired
For consideration of contributed papers in Special S~ssions:
August 6, 2003
For abstracts: October 1, 2003
For summaries of papers to MAA organizers: To be announced
Joint Invited Addresses
Bonnie Berger, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Title to be announced (AMS-MAA Invited Address).
Stephen Wolfram, Wolfram Research Inc., Title to be
announced (AMS-MAA Invited Address).
AMS Invited Addresses
Michael Aschbacher, California Institute of Technology,
Title to be announced.
Hyman Bass, University of Michigan, Title to be announced
(AMS Retiring Presidential Address).
Sun-Yang Alice Chang, Princeton University, Title to be
announced (AMS Colloquium Lectures).
750

Gregory F. Lawler, Cornell University, Title to be
announced.
James A. Yorke, University of Maryland, Title to be
announced.
MAA Contributed Paper Sessions
The organizers listed below solicit papers pertinent to
their sessions. Presentations are generally limited to ten
minutes, but selected participants may extend their contributions up to twenty minutes. Please note that the dates
and times scheduled for these sessions remain tentative.
See the end of this announcement for specific submission
procedures and other details.
Teaching a History ofMathematics Course (MAA CP A 1),
Wednesday morning, Joel K. Haack~·:,JoeI.Haack@uni.edu,
University of Northern Iowa; and Amy E. Shell-Gellasch,
United States Military Academy. This session solicits papers on the teaching of history of mathematics courses.
Papers can address courses at all levels and types, from
general history courses for educators to topic-specific
courses for majors. Special consideration will be given to
papers that present ideas on how to organize and develop
history of mathematics courses. Other topics such as ideas
for units or Web usage will be considered.
Teaching Operations Research in the Undergraduate
Classroom (MAA CP B1), Wednesday morning, Dipa Choudhury~':, Loyola College, MD, dsc@loyola.edu; and StevenM.
Hetzler, Salisbury State University. This session seeks to
mghlight innovative teaching strategies in operations research in the undergraduate classroom. These strategies
could include the construction of new teaching materials
or creative use of existing materials. Submissions should
provide specific learning objectives addressed by the use
of these materials. In addition, potential speakers should
provide some of the following information: (1) the syllabus
of the course you teach, (2) a personal philosophy (with
examples) of technology integration in the classroom, (3)
interesting case studies, o~ (4) suggestions on textbooks
and/or software.
Uses of the WWW That Enrich and Promote Learning
(MAA CP C1), Wednesday and Saturday afternoons, Marcelle Bessmani :' Jacksonville UniverSity, mbessma@ju.edu;
Marcia P. Birken, Ro'chester Institute of Technology;
Mary L. Platt, Salem State College; and Brian E. Smith,
McGill University. This session seeks to highlight uses of
the Web and its tools that engage students in the learning
process. Tools such as course management systems,
digital resources, tutorial systems, and hybrids that combine these functions on the Web can make a difference in
student engagement, understanding, and performance.
Talks should demonstrate how these technologies are
being integrated into the learning process. The session
is sponsored by the MAA Committee on Computers in
Mathematics Education (CCIME).
Mathematical Experiences for Students outside the Classroom (MAA CP D 1), Wednesday morl)ing, Laura L. Kelleher~':,
Massachusetts Maritime Academy, Ikelleher@
mma.mass.edu; andMaryS. Hawkins, Prairie View A&MUniversity. Mathematics "happens" outside the classroom, and
in fact many mathematics majors are drawn to the subject

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

Meetings & Conferences
through an event sponsored by a student chapter or math
club. This session seeks presentations by academic, industrial, business, or student mathematicians so that the
audience will be encouraged to organize and run events
for their students. Descriptions of nonclassroom activities
could include, but are not limited to, special lectures,
workshops for students, math days, math fairs, research
projects for students, career days, recreational mathematics, problem-solving activities, and student consultants. This session is organized by the MAA Committee on
Undergraduate Student Activities and Chapters.
Courses below Calculus: A New Focus (MAA CP E1),

Wednesday afternoon and Thursday morning, Mary Robinson":, University of New Mexico, Valencia Campus,
maryrobn@unm.edu; Florence S. Gordon, New York Institute of Technology; Arlene H. Kleinstein, SUNY at Farmingdale; Norma M. Agras, Miami Dade Community College;
Laurette B. Foster, Prairie View A&M University; and Linda
Martin, Albuquerque T-VI. An unprecedented collaborative
effort is currently being developed among members of the
MAA, AMATYC, and NCTM to launch a national initiative
to refocus the courses below calculus to better serve the
majority of students taking these courses. The goal of the
initiative is to encourage courses that place much greater
emphasis on conceptual understanding and realistic applications via mathematical modeling than traditional
courses that too often are designed to develop algebraic
skills needed for calculus. For this session we specifically
seek to address all of the college-level "courses below
calculus, with particular emphasis on offerings in college
algebra and precalculus. We seek presentations that present new visions for such courses, discuss implementation
issues (such as faculty training, placement tests, introduction of alternative tracks for different groups of
students, transferability problems, etc.) related to offering such courses, present results of studies on student
performance and tracking data in both traditional and
new versions of these courses and in follow-up courses,
discuss the needs of other disciplines and the workplace
from courses at this level, discuss connections to the
changing school curricula and implications for teacher
education. This session is cosponsored by the MAA CUPM
Subcommittee on Curriculum Renewal Across the First
Two Years (CRAFTY), the MAA Committee on Two Year
Colleges, and the MAA Committee on Articulation and
Placement.
Getting Students to Discuss and Write about Mathematics (MAA CP Fl ), Wednesday afternoon, Sarah L. Mabrouk~\
Framingham State College, smabrouk@frc.mass.edu. This

session invites papers about assignments and projects
that require students to communicate mathematics through
in-class oral presentations that they make or in-class discussions that they must lead and motivate and through
written assignments and/or papers. These assignments can
include analysis and applications of mathematics, presentations of and analysis of proofs, presentations about
famous mathematicians and the mathematics that they
studied, and assignments/projects that utilize creative
writing. Each presenter is encouraged to discuss how the
use of the assignment/project helped students to improve
JUNE/jULY 2003

their understanding of mathematics and their ability
to communicate mathematics. Of particular interest is
the effect of such projects/assignments/presentations
throughout the course on the students' understanding of
mathematics, their communication of mathematics, and
their attitude toward mathematics.
The Effective Use of Computer Algebra Systems in the
Teaching of Mathematics (MAA CP G1), Wednesday afternoon, L. Carl Leinbach~':, Gettysburg College, leinbach@
gettysburg.edu; and Edward A. Connors, University of

Massachusetts. Computer Algebra Systems (CAS) create an
environment for the learning and teaching of mathematics. They can be used to encourage mathematical explorations and to affect the way in which we teach and what
material we emphasize. Papers for this session are to
discuss one of the following topics: classroom uses of
CAS, student projects that use the CAS in a significant way,
testing practices that allow the students to use a CAS, or
evaluations of the overall use of CAS at a particular institution. It is expected that each presentation, in addition
to explaining the use of the CAS, will address the effectiveness of this use in the teaching and learning of mathematics. While proposals for papers dealing with the use
of a CAS in any mathematics course are welcome, preference will be given to papers dealing with the use of a CAS
in courses other than the calculus sequence. In particular,
papers on the use of the CAS in courses such as applied
statistics, college algebra,· quantitative methods, and the
mathematics preparation of teachers are particularly welcome. Note that this session is focused on the use of a CAS,
not technology in general. However, the choice of a platform (computer or handheld device) or CAS (Derive, Maple,
Mathematica, or other CAS) is that of the presenter.
Placement Strategies (MAA CP H 1), Thursday morning,
janet P. Ray":, Seattle Central Community College,
janray@sccd.ctc.edu; Susan L. Forman, Bronx Community
College, CUNY; and Patricia R. Wilkinson, Borough of
Manhattan Community College, CUNY. Proper placement
of students into their first college mathe"matics class is important to students and faculty alike. This session invites
papers that describe placement strategies and instruments
that you are using or have used at your institution. Papers
might deal with uses of homegrown or standardized instruments, non-test-based strategies, or innovative, multilayered approaches. Also invited are papers describing
how the success of your placement strategy is measured.
How do you know if it is working? Systems in place at any
type of institution or at any mathematics level are welcome.
This session is cosponsored by the MAA Committee on
Two-Year Colleges and the MAA Committee on Articulation and Placement.
Chaotic Dynamics and Fractal Geometry (MAA CP 11),

Thursday morning, Denny Gulick":, University of Maryland,
dng@math.md.edu; and Jon Scott, Montgomery College.
During the past decade and a half, the areas of chaotic dynamics and fractal geometry have emerged as lively subjects not only for research but also in the undergraduate
curriculum. One of the wonderful features of these subjects
is that they are able to combine many of the fundamental
undergraduate topics, among them calculus and analysis,

NOTICES OF THE AMS

751

Meetings & Conferences
differential equations, linear algebra, geometry, statistics,
and computer science. This session invites papers that investigate the impact of these two fields on undergraduate
mathematics. The papers, which should have an expository
flavor, might include new developments in either chaos or
fractals (or both), interesting or novel applications, undergraduate research experiences, or innovative approaches
for exploring these topics in undergraduate mathematics.
Truth in Using the History of Mathematics in Teaching
Mathematics (MAA CP J1), Thursday morning, Victor J.
Katz~':, University of the District of Columbia, vkatz@
udc.edu; and Eisso J. Atzema, University of Maine. The his-

tory of mathematics has long been accepted as a scholarly
activity for its own sake. Increasingly, historical research
is called upon by a wide variety of professionals within
the mathematical community to serve a broad range of
agendas. We seek contributions from mathematicians,
mathematics historians, and mathematics educators at
all levels that address the issue of "truth" in the use of the
history of mathematics. In particular, contributions are
welcome that consider three particular issues: (1) whether
and/or how myths and legends can be effectively used
as such in the mathematics classroom, (2) what role the
examination of myths and legends might play in a history
of mathematics course, and (3) how the mathematics
history community can contribute toward the effective
use of history by "consumers" of history. This session is
sponsored by the MAA History of Matherriatics Special
Interest Group (HOM SIGMAA).
Innovations in Teaching Discrete Mathematics (MAA CP
K1), Thursday afternoon, William E. Fenton~:, Bellarmine
University, wfenton@bellarmine.edu; and Nancy L.
Hagelgans, Ursinus College. Discrete mathematics is offered
in many mathematics departments, at different levels, for
different audiences, and with different expectations. This
session seeks presentations on novel approaches to the
teaching of discrete mathematics. These could be exploratory activities, application projects, interdisciplinary
courses, etc. We particularly encourage presentations on
the use of technology as a teaching tool or as a source of
interesting problems and applications. Evaluation of the
pedagogy is welcome though not mandatory.
Initiating and Sustaining Undergraduate Research Projects and Programs (MAA CP L1), Thursday afternoon,
James A. Davis~':, University of Richmond, jdavis@
richmond.edu; and Joel S. Foisy, State University of New

York. Papers are requested describing undergraduate research programs. Of particular interest will be descriptions
of innovative ways to get administrative support or other
support that creates a sustainable program. Also of interest
will be papers indicating where to find appropriate problems and how to gauge the right level. This session is
sponsored by the MAA CUPM Subcommittee on Research
by Undergraduates.
Mathlets for Teaching and Learning Mathematics (MAA

CP M 1), Thursday afternoon, David M. Strong~':, Pepperdine
University; David.Strong@pepperdine.edu; Thomas E.
Leathrum, Jacksonville State University; and Joe Yanik,
Emporia State University. This session seeks to provide a
forum in which presenters may demonstrate mathlets
752

and related materials that they have created or further
developed. Mathlets are small computer-based (but ideally
platform-independent) interactive tools for teaching math,
frequently developed as World Wide Web materials such
as scripts or Java applets, but there may be many other
innovative variations. Mathlets allow students to experiment
with and visualize a variety of mathematical concepts,
and they can be easily shared by mathematics instructors
around the world. The session is sponsored by the MAA
Committee on Computers in Mathematics Education
(CCIME).
Statistics Education Discourse on Inference (MAA CP N1),
Friday morning, John D. McKenzie Jr.~':, Babson College,
mckenzie@babson.edu; and Carolyn K. Cuff, Westminster College. Since the introductory statistics courses have
infused data-driven activities into the course, many learning difficulties related to data have been minimized.
However, the area of inference, a major topic in the course,
remains a stumbling block for students. Papers are solicited
which demonstrate effective teaching on inference topics,
including confidence intervals, hypothesis testing, power
and the interpretation of results~ Sponsored by the MAA
Statistics Special Interest Group (STAT SIGMAA).
Math and the Arts (MAA CP 01), Friday morning, Ann
Robertson~':, Connecticut College, arob@conncoll.edu;
John M. Sullivan, University of Illinois, Urbana; Reza
Sarhangi, Towson University; and Nathaniel A. Friedman,
State University of New York, Albany. This session seeks
interdisciplinary abstracts related to mathematics and
one or more of the following disciplines: archeology and
related fields, architecture, dance, music, literature,
theater, film, and the visual arts. Session objectives include:
(1) to present topics or new findings relating mathematics to its artistic and aesthetic presentations and (2) to
introduce innovative techniques and to demonstrate the
use of technology in promoting connections and interdisciplinary work in math and the arts.
Applications ofMathematics in Computer Science (MAA

CP P1), Friday morning, WilliamA~ Marion~':, Valparaiso University, BiII.Marion@valpo.edu. This session invites papers
which illustrate examples of the application of mathematics or mathematical thinking to topics introduced in
an undergraduate computer science curriculum. These
examples should be presented in such a way that they call
be used as a .lecture example, an in-class assignment, a
homework assignment, or a project by instructors who
teach courses in computer science. Examples for use in
the following categories of courses will be considereddiscrete mathematics courses, CS 1- and IT-type courses, and
all other computer science courses-and should be of a
type which supplements the material in a standard text (or
which presents a topic in a novel way). As a follow-up to
this session, particularly interesting examples will be givell
consideration for entry into an online repository.
Mathematics Experiences in Business, Industry and Govemment(MAA CP Ql), Friday morning, Philip E. Gustafson~:,
Mesa State College, pgustafs@mesastate.edu; and

Michael G. Monticino, University of North Texas. This
paper session will provide a forum for mathematicians with
experience in business, industry, and government (BIG) to

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

Meetings & Conferences

present papers or discuss projects involving the application of mathematics to BIG problems. BIG mathematicians
as well as faculty and students in academia who are
interested in learning more about BIG practitioners,
projects, and issues will find this session of interest. This
session is sponsored by the MAA Special Interest Group
in Business, Industry and Government (BIG SIGMAA).
Teaching and Learning of Undergraduate Mathematics
(MAA CP R1), Friday afternoon and Saturday morning,
Anne E. Brown~\ Indiana University South Bend, abrown@
iusb.edu; Marilyn P. Carlson, Arizona State University;
and Draga D. Vidakovic, Georgia State University. Research
papers that address issues concerning the teaching and
learning of undergraduate mathematics are invited.
Appropriate for this session are theoretical or empirical
investigations conducted within clearly defined theoretical frameworks using either qualitative or quantitative
methodologies. Of highest priority are proposals that report on completed studies which further existing work in
the field. Sponsored by the MAA Research in Undergraduate
Mathematics Education Special Interest Group (RUME
SIGMAA).
My Favorite Demo: Innovative Strategies for Mathematics Instructors (MAA CP 51), Friday afternoon and
Saturday morning, David R. Hill~':, Temple University,
hill@math.temple.edu; and Lila F. Roberts, Georgia Southern University. Mathematics instructors use a myriad of
innovative techniques for teaching mathematical concepts.
Technology readily available in colleges and universities
has provided a means to boost creativity and flexibility in
lesson design. Tools an instructor utilizes may include
specialized computer applications, animations and other
multimedia tools, java applets, physical devices, games, etc.
This contributed paper session will focus on novel demos
that mathematics instructors have successfully used in
their classrooms. Rather than focus on projects or student
group activities, this contributed paper session will focus
on the instructor's activities to facilitate learning. Mathematical content areas will include precalculus, calculus,
elementary probability, and selected postcalculus topics.
This session invites 1) demos that introduce a topic,
2) demos that illustrate how concepts are applicable,
3) demos that tell a story or describe the development of
a procedure, and 4) demos that lead to an activity that involves the class. Presenters of demos are encouraged to
give the demonstration, if time and equipment allow, and
to discuss how to use it in a classroom setting. Proposals
should describe how the demo fits into a course; the use
of technology or technology requirements, if any; and the
effect of the demo on student attitudes toward mathematics.
Mathematical Models of the Environment (MAA CP Tl ),
Friday afternoon, Karen D. Bolinger~':, Clarion University,
kbolinge@clarion.edu; William D. Stone, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology; and Ahlam E.Tannouri,
Morgan State University. We invite presentations that deal
with all aspects of using mathematics to modefproblems
of the environment. Presentations are welcome that deal
with exposition, pedagogy, or elementary modeling and that
are suitable for college-level mathematics classes. Also
JUNE/JULY 2003

welcome are presentations that deal with student research
efforts, senior capstone experiences, group projects, and
applications of higher mathematics, whether they fit within
any course, weave through many mathematics courses, or
stretch across departmental boundaries. Talks especially
valued are those that make practical suggestions concerning how to establish frUitful communication between
mathematicians and applied scientists and how to stimulate mathematics students into thinking about real world
problems in terms of the mathematics they study. This session is sponsored by the MAA Environmental Mathematics Special Interest Group (ENVIRON SIGMAA) and the
MAA Committee on Mathematics and the Environment.
Philosophy of Mathematics (MAA CP U 1), Friday afternoon, Roger A. Simons~':, Rhode Island College,
. rsimons@ric.edu; and Satish C. Bhatnagar, University of
Nevada, Las Vegas. This session invites papers on any
topic in the philosophy of mathematics except logic and
set theory. Possible topics include the nature of mathematics, the nature of mathematical objects, the nature of
mathematical knowledge, the relation between mathematics and the physical world, and the role of esthetics in
the development of mathematics.
Focus on Integrating Graphic Handhelds into Collegiate
Mathematics (MAA CP Vl), Saturday morning, Charles E.
Hofmann~':; LaSalle University, hofmann@lasalle.edu; and
Joseph R. Fiedler, California State University Bakersfield.
The appropriate use of technology, graphic calculators,
algebra-capable calculators, and data collection devices in
the mathematics classroom has been the center of much
debate. Few are neutral regarding the use of these devices. The pervasive use by students complicates testing
and opens the field to novel and focused assessment activities. This session invites papers about the full range of
handheld devices and their classroom uses. Presenters
are encouraged not only to share their classroom activities but also to discuss how these activities fit into the overall structure of their courses and curricula. Papers for this
session are to discuss one or more of the following topics: classroom uses of handheld technologies, evaluations
of their overall use at a particular institution, strategies
for their effective incorporation into large lectures or into
service courses, use of handheld technologies in significant ways in student projects and laboratories, and crossdisciplinary collaborations exploiting these technologies.
Mathematics and Sports (MAA CP Wl ),. Saturday
morning, Sean L. Formani :, Saint Joseph's University,
sforman@sju.edu; and Douglas Drinen, University of the
South. When applied to the sporting arena, mathematics
can provide both compelling classroom examples and interesting research problems. Baseball has long been mined
for interesting statistics examples, ranging from regression and probability to the game-theoretic aspects of -ingame strategy. Recent books on jai alai, football, and a few
other sports have studied those sports through a mathematicallens. The economics of sports is now covered by
its own journal, and the statistics publication Chance routinely discusses statistical examples from sporting events.
This session invites papers describing interesting classroom

NOTICES OF THE AMS

753

Meetings & Conferences
examples utilizing examples from sports and papers discussing the application of mathematics to sporting events.
Technology in Mathematics Teacher Preparation Courses
(MAA CP Xl), Saturday afternoon, Mary Ann Connors~':,
Westfield State College, mconnors@foma.wsc.ma.edu; and
Christine Browning, Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo. Preparing teachers to use technology appropriately
is a challenging task for teacher-educators. Handheld
computer algebra systems, graphing calculators, spreadsheets, and other computer software are popular tools for
facilitating numerical investigations, connecting mathematics topics, and incorporating multiple representations
of various meaningful problems. Such explorations lead
to students' better understanding of mathematical concepts
while empowering them to analyze practical problems.
This session invites papers presenting ways in which we
can prepare preservice teachers to use and develop meaningful activities that will engage their future students in
mathematical thinking facilitated by technological tools.
Papers that present curriculum revisions concentrating on
meaningful technology use within courses that focus on
mathematical content for preservice teachers are also
encouraged. It is the hope that these curriculum revisions
and/or activities will serve as a catalyst for class discussions of issues connected with K-I2 curriculum and
instruction, national and state standards, sequencing of
topics, the role of technology, and assessment.
Strategies That Work to Positively Change Student
Attitudes toward Mathematics (MAA CP Yl), Saturday
afternoon, Caren L. Diefenderfer~:, Hollins University,
cdiefenderfer@hollins.edu; Janet L. Andersen, Hope College;
and Elizabeth G. Yanik, Emporia State University. We solicit papers that describe strategies, both in and out of the
classroom, which demonstrate a positive impact on student
attitudes toward, and perceptions of, mathematics. These
may be strategies incorporated in math courses that general education students are "forced" to take or strategies
used in courses designed for majors. In addition, talks
may emphasize departmental activities that have helped
to create a positive esprit de corps and talks that address
encouraging members of underrepresented groups are
particularly welcome. Our concern is that many students
(including mathematics majors) leave our programs with
negative attitudes toward mathematics. We are also concerned that there are potential majors that we are not
reaching, because we are not adequately conveying the
benefits and satisfaction of doing mathematics. This
may be particularly true of underrepresented groups. We
would like the mathematics community to be aware of
successful strategies that can be modified for use in our
individual programs which will help students to learn,
experience, and believe in the joy and magic of mathematics. We are also interested in the question of how
to cultivate a mathematically appreciative society. In particular, how can such strategies be used to attract and
retain more minority students in mathematics courses?
General Contributed Paper Session (MAA CP Zl),
Wednesday, Thursday, and Saturday afternoons, Laura J.
Wallace~':, California State University San Bernardino,
wallace@csusb.edu. Papers may be presented on any math754

ematical topic. Papers that fit into one of the other sessions
should be sent to that organizer, not to this session. Any
paper that cannot be accommodated in on.e of the named
contributed paper sessions will be diverted automatically
to this session; therefore, papers should not be sent to more
than one session organizer.

Submission Procedures for MAA Contributed
Papers
Send a detailed one-page summary of your paper by email
directly to the organizer indicated with an asterisk Ck) no
later than September 9, 2003; concurrently, submit your
abstract directly to the AMS (see below for instructions). In
order to enable the organizer(s) to evaluate the appropriateness of your paper, include as much detailed information as possible within the one-page summary limitation.
The AMS will publish abstracts for MAA talks. These will
be available online about two months before the meeting,
and paper copy will be available onsite to registered participants. Abstracts must be submitted on the appropriate
AMS form within stated limits and NO LATER THAN OCTOBER 1. Electronic submission is available via the Internet or
email. No technical knowledge of J1.T£X is necessary for submission; however, J1.T£X and AMS-J1.T£X are the only typesetting systems that can be used if display mathematics is
used or special formatting is desired. To see descriptions
and to view the electronic templates available, visit the
abstracts submission page at http://www.ams.org/
abstracts/instructions.html, or send email to:
abs-submit@ams.org, typing HELP as the subject line.
Abstracts submitted electronically are quickly either
acknowledged, with a unique abstract number assigned to
the presentation; or rejected, with a short message on what
information is missing or inappropriate. All questions concerning the submission of abstracts should be addressed
to abs-coord@ams.org. The EVENT CODE is the seven
characters appearing in the title description shown above,
e.g., MAA CP AI. The SUBJECT CODE (required in the
electronic template) is the last two-character letter/number
combination from the event code list, Le., AI.
Audiovisual equipment available for MAA talks: Each session room contains an overhead projector and screen;
blackboards will not be available. Persons needing additional equipment should contact, as soon as possible and
DEFINITELY PRIOR TO SEPTEMBER 9,2003, the session organizer whose name is followed by an asterisk (,~).

Tallahassee, Florida
Florida State University
March 12-1 3, 2004
Meeting #994
Southeastern Section
Associate 'secretary: John L. Bryant
Announcement issue of Notices: To be announced
Program first available on AMS website: To be announced
Program issue of electronic Notices: To be announced

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

Meetings & Conferences
Issue of Abstrac;ts: To be announced

Deadlines
For organizers: August 13, 2003
For consideration of contributed papers in Special Sessions:
November 25, 2003
For abstracts: J~nuary 20, 2004

Athens, Ohio
Ohio University
March 26-27,2004

Los Angeles, California
University of Southern California
April 3-4, 2004
Meeting #996
Western Section
Associate secretary: Michel L. Lapidus
Announcement issue of Notices: To be announced
Program first available on AMS website: To be announced
Program issue of electronic Notices: To be announced
Issue of Abstracts: To be announced

Meeting #995
Central Section
Associate secretary: Susan J. Friedlander
Announcement issue of Notices: To be announced
Program first available on AMS website: To be announced
Program issue of electronic Notices: To be announced
Issue of Abstracts: To be announced

Deadlines
For organizers: September 3, 2003
For consideration of contributed papers in Special Sessions:
December 16, 2003
For abstracts: February 10, 2004

Deadlines
For organizers: August 26, 2003
For consideration of contributed papers in Special Sessions:
December 9,2003
For abstracts: February 3, 2004

Dan Boneh, Stanford University, Title to be announced.

Invited Addresses

Christopher Martin Thiele, University of California
Los Angeles, Title to be announced.

Mario Bonk, University of Michigan, Title to be announced.
Irene Gamba, University of Texas, Title to be announced.
R. I.· Grigorchuk, Texas A&M University, Title to be announced.
Eric Zaslow, Northwestern University, Title to be announced.

Special Sessions
Algebraic Coding Theory (Code: AMS SS HI), Marcus
Greferath, San Diego State University, and Sergio R. L6pezPermouth, Ohio University.
Differential Equations and Control Theory (Code: AMS SS
AI), Sergiu Aizicovici and Nicolai Pavel, Ohio University. \
Dynamical Systems (Code: AMS SS Cl), Patrick D.
McSwiggen, University of Cincinnati, and Todd Young,
Ohio University.
Groups, Representations, and Characters (Code: AMS SS Bl),
Mark Lewis, Kent State University, and Thomas R. Wolf,
Ohio University.
Linear Algebra and its Applications (Code: AMS SS Fl),
S. K. jain, Ohio University, and Michael Neumann,
University of Connecticut.
Statistics and Probability (Code: AMS SS Gl), Maria Rizzo
and Vladimir Vinogradov, Ohio University.
Theory of Rings and Modules (Code:·AMS SS Dl), Nguyen
Viet Dung, Franco Guerriero, Dinh Van Huynh, and
Pramod Kanwar, Ohio University.
JUNE/jULY 2003

Invited Addresses
Maria E. Schonbek, University of California Santa Cruz, Title
to be announced.
Paul Smith, University of Washington, Noncommutative
Algebraic Geometry.

Special Sessions
Contact and Symplectic Geometry (Code: AMS SS AI),
Dragomir Dragnev, Ko Honda, and Sang Seon Kim, University of Southern California.

Lawrenceville,
New Jersey
Rider University
April 17"':18, 2004
Meeting #997
Eastern Section
Associate secretary: Lesley M. Sibner
Announcement issue of Notices: To be announced
Program first available on AMS website: To be announced
Program issue of electronic Notices: To be announced
Issue of Abstracts: To be announced
Deadlines
For organizers: September 17, 2003
For consideration of contributed papers in Special Sessions:
December 30,2003
For abstracts: February 24, 2004

NOTICES OF THE AMS

755

Meetings & Conferences
Invited Addresses
Dennis Sullivan, City College (CUNY), Title to be announced.

Vanderbilt University

Special Sessions
Algebraic Geometry and Mirror Symmetry (Code: AMS SS
DI), Ciprian B.orcea, Rider University.
Automorphic Forms and Analytic Number Theory (Code:
AMS SS AI), Stephen Miller, Rutgers University, and Ramin
Takloo-Bighash, Princeton University.
Geometry of Protein Modelling (Code: AMS SS EI), Ileana
Streinu, Smith College, and Jack Snoeyink, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Homotopical Physics (Code: AMS SS GI), James Stasheff,
University of North Carolina, and Thomas J. Lada, North
Carolina State University.
Homotopy Theory, a Special Session in Honor ofBill Browder's 70th Birthday (Code: AMS SS CI), Martin Bendersky,
Hunter College, and Donald Davis, Lehigh University.
Strings and Branes (Code: AMS SS FI), Thomas P. Branson,
University of Iowa, and S. James Gates, University of
Maryland.
Surgery, a Special Session in Honor of Bill Browder's 70th
Birthday (Code: AMS SS HI), Frank S. Quinn, Virginia Polytech Institute & State University.
Tomography and Integral Geometry (Code: AMS SS BI),
Andrew Markoe, Rider University, and Eric Todd Quinto,
Tufts University.

Houston, Texas
University of Houston
May 13- 1 5, 2004
Meeting #998
Sixth International Joint Meeting of the AMS and the
Sociedad Matematica Mexicana (SMM).
Associate secretary: John L. Bryant
Announcement issue of Notices: To be announced
Program first available on AMS website: To be announced
Program issue of electronic Notices: To be announced
Issue of Abstracts: To be announced
Deadlines
For organizers: To be announced
For consideration of contributed papers in Special Sessions:
To be announced
For abstracts: To be announced

756

Nashville, Tennessee
October 16-17,2004
Meeting #999
Southeastern Section
Associate secretary: John L. Bryant
Announcement issue of Notices: To be announced
Program first available on AMS website: To be announced
Program issue of electronic Notices: To be announced
Issue of Abstracts: To be announced
Deadlines
For organizers: March 16,2004
For consideration of contributed papers in Special Sessions:
To be announced
For abstracts: To be announced

Albuquerque,
New Mexico
University of New Mexico
October 16-1 7,2004
Meeting #1 000
Southeastern Section
Associate secretary: Michel L. Lapidus
Announcement issue of Notices: To be announced
Program first available on AMS website: To be announced
Program issue of electronic Notices: To be announced
Issue of Abstracts: To be announced
Deadlines
For organizers: March 16, 2004
For consideration of contributed papers in Special Sessions:
To be announced
For abstracts: To be announced

Evanston, Illinois
Northwestern University
October 23-24, 2004
Meeting #1 001
Central Section
Associate secretary: Susan J. Friedlander
Announcement issue of Notices: August 2004
Program first available on AMS website: September 9, 2004
Program issue of electronic Notices: October 2004
Issue of Abstracts: To be announced

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

Meetings & Conferences
Deadlines
For organizers: March 23, 2004
For consideration of contributed papers in Special Sessions:
July 7,2004
For abstracts: August 31,2004
For abstracts: To be announced
Invited Addresses

Ian Agol, University of Illinois-Chicago, Title to be announced.
Robert Ghrist, University of Illinois-Urbana, Title to be announced.
Yuri Manin, Northwestern University, Title to be announced.
Paul Siedel, Imperial College-London and University of
Chicago, Title to be announced.

Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania

Newark, Delaware
University of Delaware
April 2-3, 2005
Eastern Section
Associate secretary: Lesley M. Sibner
Announcement issue of Notices: To be announced
Program first available on AMS website: To be announced
Program issue of electronic Notices: To be announced
Issue of Abstracts: To be announced
Deadlines
For organizers: September 2, 2004
For consideration of contributed papers in Special Sessions:
To be announced
For abstracts: To be announced

University of Pittsburgh
November 6-7, 2004
Meeting #1 002
Eastern Section
Associate secretary: Lesley M. Sibner
Announcement issue of Notices: To be announced
Program first available on AMS website: To be announced
Program issue of electronic Notices: To be announced
Issue of Abstracts: To be announced
Deadlines
For organizers: April 7, 2004
For consideration of contributed papers in Special Sessions:
To be announced
For abstracts: To be announced

Atlanta, Georgia
Atlanta Marriott Marquis and Hyatt
Regency Atlanta
January 5-8,2005
Wednesday - Saturday
Joint Mathematics Meetings, including the 111 th Annual
Meeting of the AMS, 88th Annual Meeting of the Mathematical Association ofAmerica (MAA), annual meetings of
the Association of Women in Mathematics (A VVl\1) and the
National Association of Mathematicians (NAM), and the
winter meeting of the Association of Symbolic Logic (ASL).
Associate secretary: Lesley M. Sibner
Announcement issue of Notices: October 2004
Program first available on AMS website: To be announced
Program issue of electronic Notices: January 2005
Issue of Abstracts: To be announced
JUNE/JULY 2003

Deadlines
For organizers: April 5, 2004
For consideration of contributed papers in Special Sessions:
To be announced
For abstracts: To be announced
For summaries of papers to MAA organizers: To be announced

Mainz, Germany
Deutsche Mathematiker-Vereinigung (DMV)
and the Osterreichische Mathematische
Gesellschaft (OMG)
June 16-19,2005
Second Joint AMS-Deutsche Mathematiker-Vereinigung
(DMV) Meeting
.~
Associate secretary: Susan J. Friedlander
Announcement issue'of Notices: To be announced
Program first available on AMS website: To be announced
Program issue of electronic Notices: To be announced
Issue of Abstracts: To be announced
Deadlines
For organizers: To be announced
For consideration of contributed papers in Special Sessions:
To be announced
For abstracts: To be announced

San Antonio, Texas
Henry B. Gonzalez Convention Center
January 12-1 5,2006
Thursday - Sunday
Joint Mathematics Meetings, including the 112th Annual
Meeting of the AMS, 89th Annual Meeting of the Mathematical Association of America, annual meetings of the

NOTICES OF THE AMS

757

Meetings & Conferences

Association for Women in Mathematics (AWM) and the
National Association of Mathematicians (NAM), and the
winter meeting of the Association for Symbolic Logic (ASL).
Associate secretary: John L. Bryant
Announcement issue of Notices: October 2005
Program first available on AMS website: To be announced
Program issue of electronic Notices: January 2006
Issue of Abstracts: To be announced
Deadlines
For organizers: April 12, 2005
For consideration of contributed papers in Special Sessions:
To be announced
For abstracts: To be announced
For summaries of papers to MAA organizers: To be announced

New Orleans,
Louisiana

National Association of Mathematicians (NAM), and the
winter meeting of the Associaiton for Symbolic Logic (ASL).
Associate secretary: Michel L. Lapidus
Announcement issue of Notices: October 2007
Program first available onAMS website: November 1, 2007
Program issue of electronic Notices: January 2008
Issue of Abstracts: Volume 29, Issue 1
Deadlines
For organizers: April 6, 2007
For consideration of contributed papers in Special Sessions:
To be announced
For abstracts: To be announced
For summaries of papers to MAA organizers: To be announced

Washington, District
of Columbia
Marriott Wardman Park Hotel and
Omni Shoreham Hotel

New Orleans Marriott and Sheraton
New Orleans Hotel
January 4-7,2007
Thursday - Sunday
Joint Mathematics Meetings, including the 113th Annual
Meeting of the AMS, 90th Annual Meeting of the Mathematical Association ofAmerica (MAA), annual meetings of
the Association for Women in Mathematics (A WM) and the
National Association of Mathematicians (NAM), and the
winter meeting of the Association for Symbolic Logic (ASL).
Associate secretary: Susan J. Friedlander
Announcement issue of Notices: October 2006
Program first available on Al\1S website: To be announced
Program issue of electronic Notices: January 2007
Issue of Abstracts: To be announced
Deadlines
For organizers: April 4, 2006
For consideration of contributed papers in Special Sessions:
To be announced
For abstracts: To be announced
For summaries of papers to MAA organizers: To be announced

January 7-10,2009
Wednesday - Saturday
Joint Mathematics Meetings, including the 115th Annual
Meeting of the AMS, 92nd Annual Meeting of the Mathematical Association ofAmerica (MAA), annual meetings of
the Association for Women in Mathematics (AWM) and the
National Association of Mathematicians (NAM), and the
winter meeting of the Association for Symbolic Logic (ASL).
Associate secretary: Lesley M. Sibner
Announcement issue of Notices: October 2008
Program first available onAMS website: November 1, 2008
Program issue of electronic Notices: January 2009
Issue of Abstracts: Volume 30, Issue 1
Deadlines
For organizers: April 7, 2008
For consideration of contributed papers in Special Sessions:
To be announced
For abstracts: To be announced
For summaries of papers to MAA organizers: To be announced

San Diego, California
San Diego Convention Center
January 6-9,2008
Sunday - Wednesday
Joint Mathematics Meetings, including the 114th Annual
Meeting of the AMS, 91st Annual Meeting of the Mathematical Association ofAmerica (MAA), annual meetings of
the Association for Women in Mathematics (A WM) and the
758

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

Gifts to the AMS are tax deductible.

(~}AMS
~

AMERICAN MATHEMATICAL SOCIETY

I

www.ams.org

I

Meetings and Conferences of the AMS
Associate Secretaries of the AMS
Western Section: Michel L. Lapidus, Department of Mathematics, University of California, Sproul Hall, Riverside, CA
92521-0135; e-mail: 1 api dus@math. ucr. edu or 1 api dus@
mathserv. ucr. edu; telephone: 909-787-3113.
Central Section: Susan J. Friedlander, Department of Mathematics, University of Illinois at Chicago, 851 S. Morgan (M/C
249), Chicago, IL 60607-7045; e-mail: susan@math. nwu. edu; telephone: 312-996-3041.

Eastern Section: Lesley M. Sibner, Department of Mathematics, Polytechnic University, Brooklyn, NY 11201-2990;
e-mail: lsi bner@duke. po 1y. edu; telephone: 718-260-3505.
Southeastern Section: John L. Bryant, Department of Mathematics, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL 32306-4510;
e-mail: bryant@math. fsu. edu; telephone: 850-644-5805.

The Meetings and Conferences section of the Notices
gives information on all AMS meetings and conferences
approved by press time for this issue. Please refer to the page
numbers cited in the table of contents on this page for more
detailed information on each event. Invited Speakers and
Special Sessions are listed as soon as they are approved by
the cognizant program committee; the codes listed are needed
for electronic abstract submission. For some meetings the list
may be incomplete. Information in this issue may be dated.
Up-to-date meeting and conference information at
www.ams.org/meetings/.

Meetings:
2003
June 18-21
October 2-4
October 11-12
October 24-25
December 17-20
2004
January 7-10
March 12-13
March 26-27
April 3-4
April 17-18
May 13-15
October 16-17
October 16-17
October 23-24
November 6-7
2005
January 5-8
April 2-3
June 16-19

2006
January 12-15
2007
January 4-7
2008
January 6-9
2009
January 7-10

I

Seville, Spain
Boulder, Colorado
Binghamton, New York
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Bangalore, India
Phoenix, Arizona
Annual Meeting
Tallahassee, Florida
Athens, Ohio
Los Angeles, California
Lawrenceville, New Jersey
Houston, Texas
Nashville, Tennessee
Albuquerque, New Mexico
Evanston, Illinois
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Atlanta, Georgia
Annual Meeting
Newark, Delaware
Mainz, Germany

p. 745
p.747
p. 747
p. 748
p. 749

p. 757
p. 757
p. 757

p. 757

New Orleans, Louisiana
Annual Meeting

p. 758

San Diego, California
Annual Meeting

p. 758

Washington, D.C.
Annual Meeting

p. 758

Important Information regarding AMS Meetings
Potential organizers, speakers, and hosts should refer to
page 108 in the January 2003 issue of the Notices for general
information regarding participation in AMS meetings and
conferences.

Abstracts

p. 750
p. 754
p. 755
p. 755
p. 755
p. 756
p. 756
p. 756
p. 756
p. 757

San Antonio, Texas
Annual Meeting

I

Several options are available for speakers submitting
abstracts, including an easy-to-use interactive Web form. No
knowledge of IbTEX is necessary to submit an electronic form,
although those who use mEX may submit abstracts with
such coding, and all math displays and similarily coded material (such as accent marks in text) must be typeset in IbTEX.
To see descriptions of the forms ,available, visit http: / /
www.ams.org/abstracts/instructions.html,orsendmail
to abs-submi t@ams. org, typing he1p as the subject line; descriptions and instructions on how to get the template of your
choice will be e-mailed to you.
Completed abstracts should be sent to abs-submit@
ams. org, typing submi ssi on as the subject line. Questions
about abstracts may be sent to abs-i nfo@ams. org.
Paper abstract forms may be sent to Meetings & Conferences Department, AMS, P.O. Box 6887, Providence, RI 02940.
There is a $20 processing fee for each paper abstract. There
is no charge for electronic abstracts. Note that all abstract deadlines are strictly enforced. Close attention should be paid to
specified deadlines in this issue. Unfortunately, late abstracts
cannot be accommodated.

Conferences: (See http://www . ams. org/meeti ngs/ for the most up-to-date information on these conferences.)

June 8 - July 24,2003: Joint Summer Research Conferences in the Mathematical Sciences, Snowbird, Utah.

760

NOTICES OF THE AMS

VOLUME 50, NUMBER 6

A Mathematician's
Survival Guide
Graduate School and

Early Career Development
-Steven G. Krantz,
Washington University, St. Louis, MO
Graduate school marks the first step toward a career in mathematics
for young mathematicians. During this period, they make important
decisions which will affect the rest of their careers. Here now is a detaOled
guide to help students navigate graduate school and the years that follow.
In his inimitable and forthright style, Steven Krantz addresses the major issues of graduate school,
including choosing a program, passing the qualifying exams, finding an advisor, writing a thesis, and
getting that first job. As with his earlier guide, How to Teach Mathematics, he avoids generalities, giving
clear advice on how to handle real situations.
August 2003; approximately 240 pages; Softcover; ISBN 0-82 I8-3455-X; List $28; All AMS members $22;
Order code GSCMBK306

Also Available by Steven G. Krantz
Techniques of Problem Solving
1997; 465 pages; Softcover; ISBN 0-821 8-061 9-X;
List $34;AII AMS members $27; Order code TPSBK306

APrln~of
Ala: ·1l-~mJ\d(:a1

Writing

lId·gj£lf'i/iq..1tri:I<m'lt.. !h\1U}~

Solutions Manual for Techniques
of Problem Solving

1.k'1'fIk<",,'W,~~,!'»iJli(olj,'i\,

""'~1,lfl>Jl"I'i'it~"",i

Luis Fernandez and Haedeh Gooransarab,

Washington University, St. Louis, MO
1997; 188 pages; Softcover; ISBN 0-8218-0628-9;
List $13;AII AMS members $10; Order code SMTPSBK306

How to Teach Mathematics, Second Edition
1999; 307 pages; Softcover; ISBN 0-8218-1398-6; List $25;AII AMS members $20; Order code HTM/2BK306

A Primer of Mathematical Writing
1997; 223 pages; Softcover; ISBN 0-8218-0635-1; List $20; All AMS members $16; Order code PMWBK306

For many more publications of interest, visit the AMS Bookstore:

1-800-321-4AMS (4267), in the U. S. and Canada, or 1-401-455-4000; fax: 1-40 1-455-4046; email: cust-serv@ams.org.
American Mathematical Society, 201 Charles Street, Providence, RI 02904-2294, USA

7/03

SPRINGER FOR MATHEMATICS
Springer congratulates Jean-Pierre Serre
on winning the first Abel Prize in
Mathematics

CEUV
CEUVRES
CQl.LECTF.D PAPERS

COLLECTED
PAPERS
JEAN-PIERRE SERRE, College
de France, Paris, France

"These volumes collect
almost all of the
research and
expository papers of l.P. Serre published in mathematical journals
through 1984, as well as some of his
seminar reports, and a few items not
previously published....Throughout his
writings, Serre has liberally sprinkled open
questions and conjectures. Most endnotes
list subsequent progress made on these
questions or improvements to the main
results of the papers. Some make additional
comments, and a few are corrections. These
endnotes alone justify the publication ofthe
collected works. Serre is one of the masters
ofmathematical exposition. .. "
tSpcitl£'"

- JAMES MILNE, UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGA ,
I MATHEMATICAL REVIEWS
VOLUME 1: 1949 -1959
2003/619 PP.jSOFTCOVER/$49,95
ISBN 3-540-43562-X
VOLUME 2: 1960 - 1971
2003/748 PP.jSOFTCOVER/$49.95
ISBN 3-540-43563-8
VOLUME 3: 1972 -1984
2003/737 PP./SOFTCOVER/$49.95
ISBN 3-540-43564-6
VOLUME 4: 1985 - 1998
2003/702 PP./SOFTCOVER/$49.95
ISBN 3-540-43565-4

GENERALIZED VERSES
Theory and Applications
SECO DEDITIO
A. BEN-ISRAEL, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ;
and T.N.E. GREVILLE, deceased

The field of generalized inverse has grown
much since the appearance of the fITst
edition in 1974, and is still growing. This
book accounts for these developments while
maintaining the informal and leisurely style
of the first edition. New material has been
added, including a chapter on applications,
an appendix on the work of E.H. Moore,
new exercises and applications.
2003/440 PP.jHARDCOVER $69.95
ISBN 0-387-00293-6
eMS BOOKS IN MATHEMATICS, VOL. 15

NONCOMMUTATIVE DYNAMICS
AND ESEMIGROUPS
W. ARVESON, University of California, Berkeley

This book presents a comprehensive
development of the theory of semigroups of
endomorphisms of von Neumann algebras
as it has evolved since the mid 1980s. It is
the first book that addresses this rapidlydeveloping subject in a systematic way. It is
aimed at researchers and graduate students
whose work makes contact with the
dynamics of noncommutative algebras,
especially those involving infmitely many
degrees of freedom.
2003/440 PP.jHARDCOVER/$79.95
ISBN 0-387-00151-4
SPRINGER MONOGRAPHS IN MATHEMATICS

GALOIS TH .DRY OF I EA
DFFEREAL EQUATIONS

STOC ASTle APPROXIMATIO
AND RECU IVE A GORITHMS

M. VAN DER PUT, University of Groningen t The
Netherlands; and M.F. SINGER, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh

SECO DEDITIO

Linear differential equations fonn the
central topic of this volume, with the Galois
theory being the unifying theme. A large
number of aspects are presented: algebraic
theory especially differential Galois theory,
formal theory, classification, algorithms to
decide solvability in finite term ,
monodromy and Hilbert's 21 st problem,
asymptotics and sununability, the inverse
problem and linear differential equations in
positive characteristic. This volume will
become a standard reference for all working
in this area of mathematics at the graduate
level, including graduate students.
2002/478 PP./HARDCOVER/ $99.00
ISBN 3-540-44228-6
GRUNDLEHREN DER MATHEMATISCHEN
WISSENSCHEFTEN, VOL. 328

AND APPLICATIONS
H.J. KUSHNER, Brown University, Providence, RI; and
G.G. YIN, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI

This revised and expanded second edition
presents a thorough development of the
modern theory of stochastic approximation
or recursive stochastic algorithms for both
constrained and unconstrained problems.
There is a complete development of both
probability one and weak convergence
methods for very general noise processes.
The proofs of convergence use the ODE
method, the most powerful to date. The
assumptions and proof methods are
designed to cover the needs of recent
applications. Many motivating examples
from learning theory, ergodic cost problems
for discrete event systems, wireless
communications, adaptive control, signal
processing, and elsewhere illustrate the
applications of the theory.
2003/520 PP.jHARDCOVER/$79.95
ISBN 0-387-00894-2
APPUCATIONS OF MATHEMATICS, VOL. 35

Essential
Mathematical
Biology
..!.

ESSENTIAL
MATHEMATICAL
BIOLOGY
N.F.BRITTON, University of
Bath, UK

~

Essential
"..8... Mathematical Biology
SprJ"1l
!! is a self-contained
introduction to the
fast-growing field of mathematical biology,
written for students with a mathematical
background. It sets the subject in its
historical context, but guides the reader
towards questions of current research
interest. A broad range of topics is covered,
including population dynamics, infectious
diseases, population genetics and evolution,
dispersal, molecular and cellular biology,
and pattern formation cancer modeling.
Particular attention is paid to situations
where the simple assumptions of
homogeneity made in early models break
down, and the process of mathematical
modeling is seen in action. Britton delivers
a comprehensive overview of this exciting
field of modern applied mathematics, and
provides a solid foundation for interdisciplinary research in the biological sciences
tf

2003/352 PP., 93 ILLUS.jSOFTCOVER/$34.95
ISBN 1-85233-536-X
SPRINGER UNDERGRADUATE MATHEMATICS SERIES

DV AMICAL SYSTEMS IN
POPULATION BIOLOGY
X.-Q. ZHAO, Memorial University, NeWfoundland, Canada

This research monograph provides an
illtroduction to the theory of nonautonomous semiflows with applications to
population dynamics. It develops dynamical
system approaches to various evolutionary
equations such as difference, ordinary,
functional, and partial differential
equations, and pays more attention to
periodic and almost periodic phenomena.
This book is aimed at research mathematicians working with nonlinear dynamics, but
it can also be used as a textbook or as
supplementary reading for a graduate
special topics course on the theory and
applications of qynamical systems.

-

-==
=
iiiiiiiiiiiiiii

2003/APPROX. 295 PP./HARDCOVER/$79.95
ISBN 0-387-00308-8
CMS BOOKS IN MATHEMATICS, VOL. 16

=~

N=
I

iiiiiiiiiiiiiii

\"Q==
=======

\"Q~

ORDER TODAY!

N

====
N
-

CALL: TOLL-FREE i-800-SPRINGER

====

WEB: WWW.SPRINGER-NY.COM
E-MAIL: ORDERS@SPRINGER-NY.COM

= -----

WRITE: SPRINGER-VERLAG NEW YORK

C'\

INC., DEPT. S5398, PO BOX 2485,
SECAUCUS, NJ 07096-2485

c.H~

,

VISIT: YOUR LOCAL SCIENTIFIC

====
===
'--===
=
======

-....1==
---CJ'I==
===

BOOKSTORE OR URGE YOUR LIBRARIAN
TO ORDER FOR YOUR DEPARTMENT.

..C :!'-

PRICES SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT NOTICE

-=- =

6/03

PROMOTION #55398

-==
c:

I~

~

